Busi Mavuso is an executive director and the chief executive officer at Business Leadership South Africa, an independent association of the leaders of some of South Africa’s biggest and most well-known organisations. Business Leadership is also a forum for engaging key players, including civil society and labour, to exchange ideas in the national interest, and to create effective dialogue with government and other stakeholders. Mavuso began her career in finance and over the last 24 years, has had experience in a range of industries, ranging from training, consulting, telecoms and the healthcare sectors. She is a Chartered Certified Accountant (CCA), qualified with Association of Certified Chartered Accountants (ACCA –UK) and holds a Master’s Degree in Business Leadership, a Postgraduate Qualification in Management from GIBS and a B. Compt in Accounting from the University of South Africa (UNISA). She also serves as a non-executive director on the Board of Eskom; Business Unity South Africa (BUSA); and serves on the Advisory Committee on Finance & Procurement at the University of Fort Hare. Mavuso previously served as a managing director of the Black Management Forum (BMF), during which she was responsible for driving the overall strategy of the organisation, including its representation at various public forums, at the request of the BMF president or deputy president. In this episode of Business Talk with Michael Avery, Mavuso discusses the poor operating environment in South Africa currently, which in turn has led to the current economic situation, and social instability. We are sitting in a country where much spoken-about structural reforms have not been implemented. She says that the president’s economic recovery plan is vital, but needs to be implemented for businesses to be able to survive and to bring down unemployment rates across all sectors. Mavuso notes that ratings firms continue to complain about the same issues that have plagued the country for years, including the position of state owned entities. She also runs Michael through the latest initiative by corporate SA to formally commit to paying its small and medium enterprise (SME) suppliers within 30 days. The full interview is embedded below. You can find all the Business Talk with Michael Avery interviews here. <span style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" data-mce-type="bookmark" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> Read: Business Talk – In conversation with Valdene Reddy