Frogfoot Networks, a licensed open-access infrastructure provider has announced two fibre-to-the-home (FTTH) Black Friday deals aimed at making it easier for South Africans to experience the benefits of better connectivity for themselves before making a commitment. “We have worked with over 140 Internet Service Providers (ISPs) on our network to introduce these Black Friday special offers, which are aimed at providing users with an opportunity to test out fibre for themselves before they make the switch,” said Shane Chorley, Head of Sales and Marketing at Frogfoot. Click here to order fibre from Frogfoot. Chorley said that new customers will be able to choose between either one of the two Black Friday special offers, which are available whether they are looking to try out uncapped or capped packages: Free installation in the following areas for orders logged between 27 November and the end of February 2021: Polokwane, Tzaneen, Franschhoek, and Port Elizabeth including Uitenhage and Despatch. While the cost of installation is set by ISPs, this represents a saving of at least R1 500 or more. Over 70,000 homes stand to benefit from this Black Friday special offer.
Sign up for FTTH between 27 November and 31 December, and only start being billed on 1 March 2021. Frogfoot will install into the home as per normal, and customers will be billed for their standard installation when they start getting billed. This offer is not available in areas that qualify for a free installation. In both cases, additional build costs will be incurred if the installation has to cover over 30 metres. In order to cater for the growing demand for fibre around the country, Frogfoot has adopted a strategy of rolling out its network to secondary cities and towns, bringing cost-effective, stable and high speed connectivity to residents in areas such as such as Amanzimtoti, Caledon, Ermelo, George, Kimberley, Mossel Bay, Richards Bay, White River and more. In addition, Frogfoot’s Double Up promotion which sees customers having their line speed increased to the next available tier at no cost to them, will continue to run in approved areas over the festive season, helping keep South Africans connected with family and friends. “Collectively, over 240 000 homes stand to benefit from these Black Friday special offers, and residents can easily sign up on either the Frogfoot website, or with their preferred ISP. Customers can refer to their preferred ISP for their specific terms and conditions around these Black Friday special offers,” says Chorley. Click here to order fibre from Frogfoot. This article was published in partnership with Frogfoot Networks.