FNB is rolling out its online secure authentication service to all merchants and individual customers to provide an additional layer of security for digital transactions ahead of Black Friday. Online secure, widely known as 3D Secure, is the process of authenticating a cardholder during an eCommerce transaction. In line with industry requirements, FNB says it has upgraded all merchants and cardholders to online secure authentication to ensure enhanced user experience, security and flexibility. Effectively FNB customers will now have to authenticate themselves when making online purchases, the bank said. “Customers previously received a One Time Pin (OTP) via SMS or email when they performed an online purchase. As of 10 November, all customers now receive a push notification on their phone on their verified FNB app to authenticate the purchase,” the bank said. “If the customer does not have the FNB app or does not respond to the FNB app push message to approve their online purchase, they will receive the OTP via SMS, app messaging and by logging onto online banking messaging.” Receiving a OTP via email is being discontinued for safety measures. Where FNB is satisfied that the online purchase is secure, customers will not be required to approve their purchase. This will result in fast secure authentication, especially during busy periods like Black Friday and Cyber Monday, said Chris Labuschagne, chief executive of FNB Card. In addition, the bank now allows customers to update their online secure contact details via the FNB App. Updating of online secure via online banking and call centre will also be discontinued, he said. “We encourage customers to opt for convenient and safer ways to shop during Black Friday in line with Covid-19 safety guidelines. More importantly, many local retailers have begun offering Black Friday specials much earlier than usual to improve the shopping experience for consumers. “We also encourage customers to use trusted platforms when shopping online and remind everyone to always keep information such as PINs and passwords safe and to only authenticate transactions they have initiated. “We remind customers that FNB will never request their private information such as a One Time PIN or their card PIN for any reason. FNB said additional updates will further enable customers to complete transactions when shopping online through new payment methods such as digital wallets, QR code and mobile payments from Apps: Scan to Pay The cardholder will open up the FNB App;
The cardholder will navigate to FNB Pay and select ‘Scan to Pay’;
The phone camera will open for the cardholder to scan the QR code on the web page. The cardholder will select which account they want to make the payment from;
Cardholder confirms payment. Payment request The cardholder will receive a push notification on their phone from the FNB App;
The cardholder will log into the FNB App;
Cardholder selects ‘Pay now’. The cardholder will select which account they want to make the payment from;
Cardholder confirms payment. Read: Warning over rise in fraudulent credit applications in South Africa