Deputy national police commissioner Bonang Mgwenya has been dismissed following ‘damning allegations’ of her alleged involvement in crimes, the South African Police Service (SAPS) said in a statement on Friday (13 November). Mgwenya appeared briefly in court on 12 October after she was arrested by the investigating directorate on criminal charges relating to corruption, fraud, theft and money laundering. “Following due processes, the National Commissioner initially suspended Bonang Mgwenya on 15 October 2020 during which time a departmental investigation was conducted.” the SAPS said in a statement. “Mgwenya was subsequently charged, found guilty and summarily dismissed yesterday, 12 November 2020.” Speaking on the dismissal, national police commissioner General Kehla Sitole said he remains ‘resolute’ in his efforts to clean the SAPS of any form of wrongdoing by members of all ranks. The issue of corruption has remained a key focal point of president Cyril Ramaphosa with key government and political figures in the spotlight due to allegations. In a parliamentary Q&A session on Thursday (12 November), the president said that the fight against corruption and state capture has required ‘extensive measures’ to stabilise and revitalise law enforcement agencies. “Much work has been done to ensure these agencies have the personnel, skills and resources they need to undertake the demanding tasks of detecting, investigating and successfully prosecuting instances of corruption.” The president said that since the beginning of his administration, the Hawks has established task teams to fast track corruption investigations in municipalities, government and the private sector. Together with the National Prosecuting Authority, the Hawks have prioritised 10 priority corruption-related cases to fast track for investigation and prosecution, he said. “To enable the directorate to address complex and organised corruption, personnel have been seconded from the South African Police Service, the Hawks and the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (IPID). “As further evidence of improved cooperation, the investigating directorate has also secured forensic accountants and legal resources from SARS, the SIU, FIC, Reserve Bank and State Security Agency.” Read: Ramaphosa on trade, corruption, and the plan to reduce the gap between black and white South Africans