President Cyril Ramaphosa will brief the nation next week on South Africa’s lockdown strategy around the coronavirus pandemic. Minister in the presidency Jackson Mthembu said on Thursday (5 November) that the briefing will be based on a cabinet meeting and suggestions provided by the National Coronavirus Command Council which are to be held later this week. Mthembu added that the cabinet was concerned that South Africans have grown increasingly indifferent in their response to the pandemic and are no longer following lockdown regulations. “Cabinet is concerned that some people are behaving recklessly and irresponsibly as if Covid-19 no longer exists,” he said. “Cabinet calls on all people in South Africa to continue adhering to the health protocols of practising social distancing, wearing masks in public and washing our hands with water and soap or an alcohol-based sanitiser, and avoid large gatherings.” Mthembu said that responsible behaviour will ensure that the country minimises the rates of infections whilst it continues to rebuild the economy. Senior government officials have warned of an increase of coronavirus infections in parts of South Africa, with health systems facing further strain. South Africa reported 1,712 new Covid-19 cases on Wednesday (4 November), taking the total reported cases to 730,548. Deaths have reached 19,585 (a daily increase of 46), while recoveries have climbed to 660,185, leaving the country with a balance of 50,778 active cases. Warnings This week Thsonono Buyeye, acting executive mayor of Nelson Mandela Bay, said that the reintroduction of a hard lockdown in the metro, while not ideal, may need to be considered to help save lives. “A harder lockdown is not ideal, but to save lives the option might need to be explored again as the numbers are increasing rapidly. In just one day this week, we had close to 400 new infections. Unfortunately, the infections go with deaths and we have seen the deaths in the country have surpassed the 19,000 mark,” Buyeye said. The acting mayor added that the only reason that the city was seeing a second wave in coronavirus cases is due to non-compliance with current health and safety regulations. The NMB government’s comments follow similar sentiments from KwaZulu-Natal premier Sihle Zikalala, who also warned that a return to a hard lockdown is on the cards, unless the country sees a decline in the number of daily coronavirus cases. “Looking at the statistics, we can now safely say that we are definitely going back into a hard lockdown if there is no urgent and drastic change in behaviour,” the premier said. However, president Ramaphosa dismissed ‘rumours’ that South Africa is returning to a hard lockdown, however he said there are worrying trends related to Covid-19 infections, such as super spreader events. The president said that while no decision on a stricter lockdown has been made, the issue was not completely off the cards. He said he received a report on Covid-19 infections, and was still studying it – after which he would address the nation. “As South Africans we need to adhere to the measures that have been put to us by the medical advisory committee,” he said. “In the coming days…I will be able to address the people of South Africa about what we now need to do in the light of what we are going through,” he said at the end of October. Read: Government extends R350 coronavirus support to January 2021