It is no secret that Black Friday is one of the retail industry’s most important global events – and South Africa is no exception. South African consumers spent over R6-billion on Black Friday in 2019 – an increase of 36% when compared to 2018. However, in a world grappling with the devastating effects of COVID-19 on businesses, economies and the lives of consumers, this year’s Black Friday is set to be significantly different from previous years. View Game’s Black Friday deals here. African retail giant Game, for example, will be running four sets of weekly deals throughout the month of November rather than releasing all deals on 27 November – with the aim of keeping South African consumers safe and providing a seamless and comfortable shopping experience, in well-stocked Game stores situated throughout the country. Black Friday specials will run throughout the month of November. The first batch of deals launched on Monday, 2 November, and will run until Tuesday, 10 November. The second batch of weekly deals will launch on Wednesday, 11 November. These never-to-be-repeated deals will only be valid and available for the week in which they are announced. Game will also be extending its partnership with Uber Eats to include home office essentials during the Black Friday period. The partnership, which launched during level 5 of lockdown to deliver essential goods to Game customers, has seen positive uptake from South Africans with over 12,000 orders being placed during the March to October period. “In order to ensure we are able to keep our staff and customers safe, while providing a positive customer experience, we took the decision to rethink the way we approach Black Friday – which is one of the biggest events on our calendar,” said Andrew Stein, Vice President of Game. He added that as retail becomes more responsible, consumers will need to follow suit by ensuring they are saving, budgeting and spending wisely as we head into the festive season. Game was South Africa’s most Googled retailer during Black Friday 2019, and plans to ensure that more South Africans are able to take advantage of its unbeatable deals this year by offering the same deals both in-store and online, increasing staffing levels, focusing on increased stock levels for its best-selling categories, and offering its popular 1 cent surprise on all Black Friday purchases. Newsletter subscribers will have early viewing access to all Game’s Black Friday deals – subscribe here. This week’s deals can be found here. The next set of deals will be released on 11 November, through Game’s social media pages. Visit www.game.co.za This article was published in partnership with Game.