Michael Brown is the chief executive officer of Nedbank, a position he has held for a decade, having served as chief financial officer at the bank previously. Brown was educated at the University of KwaZulu-Natal (UKZN), and Harvard University, achieving the following qualifications: BCom, DipAcc, CA(SA), CD(SA), AMP (Harvard, USA). His fields of expertise lie in accounting, auditing, large corporates, retail and investment banking, other financial services, HR, marketing, business strategy and strategic planning, corporate governance and stakeholder management and doing business in emerging economies. Mike was appointed as chief financial officer in June 2004 and as chief executive in March 2010. He is currently chair of the Banking Association SA and, deputy chair of Business Leadership South Africa. He was previously an executive director of BoE Limited and, after the merger between Nedbank Limited, BoE Bank Limited, Nedcor Investment Bank Limited and Cape of Good Hope Bank Limited in 2003, he was appointed Head of Commercial Property Finance at Nedbank Limited. In this episode of Business Talk with Michael Avery, Brown talks Michael through how Nedbank – an organisation with 30,000 people – responded to lockdown in a very short space of time. He talks about the challenges of engaging with hundreds of thousands of clients daily, to assist them through a very difficult and unexpected health crisis. The chief executive also reveals the lessons he has learnt from the Covid-19 pandemic, and how these lessons can be used in future in the banking industry. Brown also talks through his thoughts on how South Africa can boost economic growth, and how private institutions like Nedbank can play a part in job creation and future economic growth. The full interview is embedded below. You can find all the Business Talk with Michael Avery interviews here. <span style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" data-mce-type="bookmark" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span>