Dr Andrew Golding is among the leading experts in South Africa’s property sector, serving as chief executive of the Pam Golding Property group, a company started by his mother and property icon Pam Golding in the 1970s. He began life as a general practitioner on the Atlantic Seaboard, practicing in the early to mid 90s. Following a significant career change at the age of 32, he took the decision to switch from general practitioner, “to effectively business at a very steep learning curve”. Almost 25 years later, and managing over 300 offices in Southern Africa and internationally, Dr Golding discusses the ups and downs of real estate business, and how the Covid-19 pandemic has impacted both his business, and the industry in general with Michael Avery on Business Talk. He talks about how Pam Golding has adapted its business model, about digitising and automating the business to adapt to future conditions likely to prevail in the wake of Covid-19 and resulting lockdown. According to Dr Golding, property buying patterns have changed in recent months, while the market is surprisingly strong thanks to a pent-up demands, and extremely low interest rates. He points out to Michael some of the trends he believes are here to stay in the market for some time, highlighting an interesting shift between renting and buying, and semigration patterns that have emerged. Dr Golding also provides interesting insight into the topic of emigration and reports of wealthy South Africans leaving the country, and he explains why he is still very optimistic about the economic prospects of the country moving forward. Internationally known for his global networking and ambassadorial role in promoting South Africa, Dr Golding is a board member of mortgage originator, Ooba. The full interview is embedded below. You can find all the Business Talk with Michael Avery interviews here. <span style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" data-mce-type="bookmark" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span>