The City of Johannesburg is recruiting for a number of vacancies, and has digitised the recruitment process as part of a continued push to become a ‘smart city’. The city said that the digital recruitment programme will also assist its drive to go paperless and adopt technological solutions for mundane human resources (HR) tasks. Enoch Mafuyeka, the city’s unit head for Talent Acquisition, said that the new HR policy has also been employed in a bid to factor social distancing protocols into consideration when conducting job interviews. “Using digital technology will hopefully help us recruit some of the best people with the most appropriate skills for the vacant posts we have in the city,” he said. Mafuyeka said that potential candidates can apply using either a smartphone or by sending an email on a desktop via a reliable Internet connection. Using digital recruitment processes creates flexibility for applicants, enabling them to do the interview remotely, he said. The digital recruitment process requires applicants to fill in the city’s virtual interview consent form after being shortlisted for the post they’ve applied for. Applicants have to consent to a few stipulations, including confirmation that they have access to the internet and adequate data to attend the virtual interview. “If applicants don’t have reliable access to the internet, they are then obliged to attend the virtual interview at a physical address that will be communicated by the Human Capital Management (HCM) representative,” Mafuyeka said. He said that shortlisted candidates are required to undergo a rigorous recruitment process through video interviews, which are digitally structured on Microsoft Teams. “The virtual interview will be recorded for the sake of transparency,” he said. Mafuyeka said that some city departments are also using social media to advertise vacant posts and source for talent. This is seen as a cost-effective option to the conventional hiring process, saving HR officials’ time and altering how the city recruits talent, Mafuyeka said. Mafuyeka said that the city may consider using a hybrid recruitment system even after the Covid-19 pandemic to make municipal operations smart. You can find out more about the jobs available in the City of Johannesburg’s government offices here. Read: How much money developers can expect to earn in South Africa right now: Cape Town vs Joburg vs Pretoria