2020 has been a difficult year for South African businesses – but 2021 is a blank slate, and many companies are seeing this as an opportunity to leverage the lessons learned and strive for growth. This is particularly true for businesses which are now embracing cloud technologies. Cloud services allow businesses to access a range of productivity tools, communications platforms, processing power, storage, and AI systems – and scale their usage as and when they need it. This gives cloud users a significant advantage over businesses which rely on older technologies to compete in their respective markets. When it comes to cloud services, Microsoft Azure is a market leader and a favourite among enterprises – and is available in South Africa through leading ICT solutions provider Axiz. As a certified Microsoft Cloud Solution Provider, Axiz offers Microsoft Azure solutions through its AxizCloud offering. In addition to this, AxizCloud functions as a cloud service aggregation platform that can manage, bill, and provision across several vendors. Microsoft Azure lets businesses access the full power of the cloud, enabling them to grow with hundreds of tools that promote productivity, resilience, and security within an organisation. This includes a wide range of solutions encompassing AI and machine learning, analytics, blockchain, compute, containers, databases, developer tools, IoT, DevOps, storage, virtual machines, mixed reality, networking, and more. Microsoft Azure also takes care of your business continuity needs through its Backup service, which provides a simple, secure, and cost-effective solution that ensures you can always restore your systems should they be compromised. This is achieved in combination with Site Recovery, which helps your business to keep running – even during major IT outages. One of the biggest advantages of using Microsoft Azure, however, is the benefits it provides for remote working. The country’s new remote working trend has made it clear that managing access and permissions is a crucial part of business, and Azure Identity tools make this easy. With Azure Identity, you can protect your business against advanced threats across devices, data, applications, and infrastructure. Azure Active Directory then allows you to identify users and manage their access to business resources and data, while Azure Active Directory External Identities extends this to stakeholders from outside your organisation. A key aspect of Microsoft Azure is that it can implemented across on-premise, hybrid-cloud, multi-cloud, and edge computing scenarios. It is designed to enable innovation and progress in businesses across all industries and all IT environments – while bringing down costs. If you’d like to take your business to the next level in 2021 with Microsoft Azure, Axiz is ready to guide you on this journey. To learn more about how Axiz and Microsoft Azure can help your business, please complete the form below.  This article was published in partnership with Axiz.