After months of global pandemic lockdown, South Africans have become increasingly worried about their future and the impact a struggling economy, government uncertainty and growing crime statistics will have on their children. They have started to look for a plan B – somewhere they can move to raise their families in a beautiful, stable and safe environment. The island of Dominica (not to be confused with the Dominican Republic) is in stark contrast to the problems South Africans face and has been described as a relative ‘Garden of Eden’. Click here to learn more about the Citizenship by Investment programme in Dominica. With a population of only 70,000 the country is safe, the land is fertile, and the government stable. Citizens feel cared for and are welcoming and friendly. With its close proximity to the USA, Dominica’s currency is pegged to the USD guaranteeing currency stability. All this combined with the easy accessibility to the rest of the world, it is no wonder that South Africans, accustomed to living in beautiful surroundings, would choose Dominica as their safe haven. Citizenship by Investment (CBI) has long been established as a relatively accessible way for someone to diversify and gain access to a second passport. By investing in a country, either through a donation or real estate options, you are able to obtain dual citizenship. As a citizen of Dominica you retain citizenship for life and have visa-free access to more than three quarters of the world including China, UK and Europe. You are also able to pass on citizenship to future generations. The Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Dominica, Roosevelt Skerrit, commented, “For us, foreign investors who become our citizens through CBI are truly valuable partners. We are proud to call them our own and to offer them a truly spectacular place to call home.” Dominica’s CBI programme is the backbone of its green growth strategy with recent eco projects including 5,000 new hurricane-proof homes and 14 new health centres. CS Global Partners, a London-headquartered legal government advisory and marketing firm, has for many years worked closely with the government of Dominica to ensure their programme remains one of the best in the world. South African born CEO, Micha Emmett, knows full well the frustrations felt by many in this country. Having spent over a decade advising South African clients on their second citizenship options she understands their concerns. “South Africans are getting increasingly worried and restless – they need options for themselves and their families,” Emmett said. “Traditionally many have looked to Europe or America but without ancestral connections this is a difficult and lengthy process.” “The Dominica CBI programme alleviates this stress by providing a clear, easy and viable option to become a part of one of the most beautiful and welcoming countries in the world. Applying to the programme is a quick and easy process with a turnaround time of only 90 days,” Emmett explained. Currently, investors have two financial contribution options in Dominica: by either making a minimum contribution of R1,629,985 (US$100,000) to the Economic Diversification Fund or investing at least R3,259,970 (US$200,000) in pre-approved real estate. The latter includes branded and boutique hotels and resorts establishing a burgeoning ecotourism sector in Dominica. Like the rest of the world, South Africans are taking stock and preparing for the future. With political, social and health-related discord gripping every corner of the globe, you cannot afford not to have a plan B. Click here to learn more about the Citizenship by Investment programme in Dominica.  This article was published in partnership with CS Global Partners.