Gauteng’s Finance and e-Government MEC Nomantu Nkomo-Ralehoko says the provincial government will set aside R1.3 billion for job creation and job protection as part of its 2020 Medium Term Budget Policy Statement. Tabling the budget on Thursday (19 November), Nkomo-Ralehoko said that the education sector will get the largest share of this budget, with R1.1 billion allocated for the hiring of education assistants. This money well also preserve posts in Quintile 4 and 5 public schools and low-income private schools, she said. “Health receives R47.4 million in additional funding to appoint enrolled and assistant/Auxiliary Nurses,” Nkomo-Ralehoko said. “We have allocated R77.8 million to Social Development to provide salary top-ups for additional compliance support duties and for employment risk support. Roads and Transport has been allocated R45.5 million for job-creation through road maintenance,” she said. The MEC said the province is facing tough economic times, which have resulted in revenue shortfalls and increased pressure on public finances. As part of the government’s push towards infrastructure to re-build and grow the economy that creates sustainable jobs, Nkomo-Ralehoko also announced an increase in the province’s infrastructure budget. Nkomo-Ralehoko said that she will increase the infrastructure budget of 2020/21 financial year by R80.8 million to R12.3 billion. “Gauteng is already working with the Infrastructure South Africa Agency in the Presidency and is planning to set up infrastructure investment to revive the provincial economy. “This drive will eventually see black South Africans, women and young people drawn into the thrust of the economy of the province,” she said. In an address to the nation on 21 April 2020, president Cyril Ramaphosa announced that R100 billion would be allocated for job protection and creation, as part of the emergency relief package in response to the Covid-19 global pandemic. The Presidential Employment Stimulus sets out to create and support 800,000 job opportunities, with R12.6 billion committed in the current financial year and an investment of R100 billion over the next three years to support the recovery of employment. To fulfil this commitment, the Presidential Employment Stimulus was designed to pursue three objectives: Expanding public and social employment, creating new opportunities for work;
Protecting existing jobs and livelihoods;
Supporting a recovery in employment through other market-based mechanisms, such as funding for the creative sector and incentives for global business services. Read: Denel to cut 13% of jobs as it fails to secure bailout