A business’s data is one of its most important assets, and it is therefore important it is protected. However, even the most robust business system is at risk of being attacked by malicious parties or being affected by accidents or disasters. Click here to get Veritas SaaS Backup Examples of potential risks that an organisation must protect against include: Human error
Deletions
Malware
Ransomware This is why it is critical that you get a backup solution that protects your organisation from a wide range of incidents. Veritas SaaS Backup is a highly secure, cloud-to-cloud backup service used to protect a number of leading SaaS applications. This product allows you to comprehensively protect your organisation from external and internal threats such as ransomware and accidental deletions. This product is also incredibly affordable, and is available from just R60.95 per user per month. Veritas SaaS Backup is designed to work with your entire Office 365, G-Suite, or Salesforce suite, and has advanced recovery capabilities that improve your suite’s RPO and RTO. The integration process is incredibly simple, making it easy to get the solution running almost immediately and providing you with access to your backed-up data anywhere and at any time. If you need to add or remove new accounts, this too is a simple process and does not require you to make any changes to your infrastructure or technologies. Instead, you can action this from the Veritas platform. On the security front, Veritas SaaS Backup provides rock-solid 256-bit AES encryption, while your data is created and retained in multiple locations to ensure redundancy. Additionally, Veritas SaaS Backup boasts 99.9% uptime secured in-flight with TLS 1.2 and at-rest with 256-bit AES encryption, while role-based access control and multi-factor authentication come standard. If your business needs a comprehensive and reliable backup service, there is no better option than Veritas SaaS Backup. Business systems aggregator Nexio is a Veritas Platinum Partner and even trusts Veritas with its own Office 365 data. If you would like to learn more about Veritas SaaS Backup, click here or email alance@nexio.co.za or bbrynard@nexio.co.za This article was published in partnership with Veritas Nexio.