2020 has been a difficult year for South African businesses, but there is light at the end of the tunnel. As 2020 draws to a close, many businesses are looking forward to 2021 as a fresh start and are using the rest of the year to plan and prepare. Click here to get your digital transformation journey underway with Turrito. Most businesses, regardless of the industry they’re in, have already reduced operational costs and activities for 2020 and are instead prioritising investment into 2021 and beyond. This almost always includes investing in modern IT systems and platforms for further cost savings, as well as improvements in efficiency, productivity and resiliency.  This is always done with a focus on POPI considering the July 2021 deadline. While the phrase “move to the cloud” has become a cliché, it is truly a critical part of preparing your business for the future. This has never been more obvious than it is now, and the COVID-19 pandemic has shown the need for data and systems to be accessible from anywhere and at any time. For some businesses, the issues caused by legacy systems during the COVID-19 pandemic have forced them to shut down completely, whereas businesses that have comprehensive cloud solutions were able to continue working.  Even the unexpected, and very badly timed, load-shedding during lockdown had far less effect on these businesses. In some situations, digitally transformed businesses actually noticed increased productivity from their employees!  This is a major reason why many experts believe remote working will continue to be prominent even once the COVID-19 pandemic is over. It is therefore no surprise that Turrito is experiencing a major increase in businesses looking to implement digital transformation strategies, with a particular focus placed on the cloud. This is not just for specific applications but for literally all aspects of IT: telephony, email, hosting, collaboration, document management and more. The ability to securely access any service from any location has never been more relevant. Using the rest of 2020 for planning, building and testing new technology solutions seems to be on everyone’s agenda and Turrito is perfectly placed to help. Regardless of economic, political, or COVID-related events, digital transformation and the cloud are the obvious next steps for businesses requiring increased efficiencies and resiliency. After an incredibly challenging year it’s good to know there’s (digital) light at the end of the tunnel! Turrito is an ICT solutions provider focusing on SME’s and the mid-market. Its speciality is helping businesses navigate their digital transformation journeys in a way that allows them to scale and thrive. Turrito customers benefit from affordable enterprise-level support and fantastic service delivery. Click here to get your digital transformation journey underway with Turrito. This article was published in partnership with Turrito.