Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma has published a new gazette which updates the country’s level 1 lockdown regulations in line with president Cyril Ramaphosa’s announcements. Published shortly after Ramaphosa concluded his address on Wednesday evening (11 November), the gazette provides for the easing of restrictions changes that are already in effect (00ho1 on 12 November). The key changes in the gazette are outlined in more detail below. Partial re-opening of borders The 18 land borders which were partially operational, will be fully operational, and the 34 land borders which were closed, will remain closed. Travelling to and from South Africa is allowed, subject to: The traveller providing a valid certificate of a negative test which was obtained not more than 72 hours before the date of travel;
In the event of the traveller’s failure to submit a certificate as proof of a negative test, the traveller will be required to quarantine him or herself at his or her own costs. International air travel remains restricted to the following airports: OR Tambo International Airport:
King Shaka International Airport;
Cape Town International Airport. The resumption of services for visa applications shall be determined in directions issued by minister of Home Affairs, Aaron Motsoaledi. The minister is also expected to work with the Department of Health and the Department of Transport on international travel containment protocols to ensure that entry into South African ports of entry will only be allowed subject to adherence to ensure Covid-19 positive travellers are not allowed into the country. Liquor sales The gazette states that the sale of liquor is permitted: By licensed premises for off-site consumption, is permitted during licensed trading hours – subject to the laws governing such licenses;
By a licensed premises for on-site consumption is permitted, subject to strict adherence to the curfew. Since the start of alert level one on 21 September 2020, licensed outlets have only been allowed to sell alcohol for home consumption on weekdays from 09h00 to 17hoo. The amended regulations effectively mean that liquor trading returns to pre-lockdown hours, with bottle stores and other retailers now able sell liquor for off-site consumption over the weekend and during all licensed trading hours. Any person who does not follow these regulations is liable to be fined or faces imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months.  Read: Ramaphosa eases lockdown level 1 restrictions – including international travel and alcohol sales