Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) applications such as Office 365, Salesforce, G Suite, and Dynamics 365 are growing in popularity among businesses. SaaS offers a plethora of benefits to your operations, one of which is that IT teams can spend fewer hours managing on-site infrastructure and dedicate more time to pursuing digital transformation. But IT organisations are discovering that when using SaaS applications, important data protection measures remain their responsibility. Click here to get your free 30-day trial of Veritas SaaS Backup now. To help companies take care of their data protection needs, Axiz offers Veritas SaaS Backup – the best way to ensure your data is protected. The Veritas SaaS Backup Service is a cloud-to-cloud backup and recovery solution that protects SaaS workloads. It offers unparalleled data protection for online documentation and collaboration tools, cloud-based office productivity apps, and messaging platforms. Data gets in-flight and at-rest data encryption backed by 99.9% service uptime and highly secure, global data centres. With Veritas Saas Backup, businesses also enjoy unlimited storage and unlimited retention for the duration of their active subscription. While SaaS products often come with their own backup solutions built-in, this is not always the ideal option. As an example, Office 365 backup has several shortcomings, including: Does not provide an isolated copy.
Lacks control over Recycle Bin.
Limited ability to recover files.
Limited recovery from ransomware and file corruption The Veritas SaaS Backup for Office 365 service allows for backing up of Microsoft Office 365 solutions more comprehensively, offering unbeatable data protection. The table below shows the supported backup items for each Veritas SaaS Backup solution. Veritas SaaS Backup offers an uncomplicated setup, allowing you to enable your protection in a few easy steps that only takes a couple of minutes to complete. Your business can also try out Veritas SaaS Backup for free on a 30-day trial, with no risk attached. Click here to get your free 30-day trial of Veritas SaaS Backup now. This article was published in partnership with Axiz Veritas.