This year has seen a notable rise in South Africans investing in a second passport, citing freedom of travel, wealth protection, and access to educational opportunities as some of the mitigating factors. Personal and professional freedom, as well as global access, are strong influencers for investors and their families. South African passport holders only have access to about 95 countries worldwide, and for globally-minded business owners and entrepreneurs, this can be very restrictive. Click here to get a limited-time offer from CS Global Partners for citizenship by investment in St Kitts and Nevis. But investing in a Citizenship by Investment (CBI) programme, affords them the ease of global travel. In countries like South Africa where political unrest, violence and turmoil can make living conditions unfavourable, family safety is a legitimate concern for investors. Many families are looking at safer environments in which to raise their families and seek better education opportunities, securing a future for generations to come. Similarly, wealth protection also plays a significant role, with investors looking to diversify their wealth, and Citizenship by Investment facilitates just this. Furthermore, the poor economic outlook, waning investment climate and concerns about property ownership are all reasons why affluent South Africans are looking for a second passport as a matter of urgency. While many do not want to leave their beloved country, they do want the security of a second passport in the case of increased political volatility. And while the UK, Australia and USA are usually top options for emigration, these have among the highest property prices in the world and many other draw-backs for South Africans. Due to a range of factors, many South Africans are looking to Caribbean countries like St Kitts and Nevis, to secure their second passport, and ultimately their futures. The Caribbean nation of St Kitts and Nevis has the worlds’ longest-standing CBI Programme and has been setting the standard in the CBI industry for decades. While most CBI investment options for St Kitts and Nevis are linked to accelerated processing times, the Sustainable Growth Fund (SGF) in particular, is known for being the most affordable, direct, and secure route to second citizenship. Granting visa-free access to 150 countries, the dual island nation also offers attractive real estate investment opportunities which are fully managed and serviced. Plus, the idyllic setting and fabulous lifestyle offer wealthy South Africans a little slice of home. Emerging year on year as one the most reputable and respected CBI Programmes, St Kitts and Nevis hinges the integrity of their Programme on their stringent due diligent processes. These strict processes protect both the host country and potential investors. The CBI programme you choose depends on your financial situation, the country and passport you favour, your financial goals and of course, family situation. It’s always recommended to speak to an expert at CS Global Partners before embarking upon your CBI journey. Click here to get a limited-time offer from CS Global Partners for citizenship by investment in St Kitts and Nevis.  This article was published in partnership with CS Global Partners.