Senior government officials have warned of an increase of coronavirus infections in parts of South Africa, with health systems facing further strain. Thsonono Buyeye, acting executive mayor of Nelson Mandela Bay, said that the reintroduction of a hard lockdown in the metro, while not ideal, may need to be considered to help save lives. “A harder lockdown is not ideal, but to save lives the option might need to be explored again as the numbers are increasing rapidly. In just one day this week, we had close to 400 new infections. Unfortunately, the infections go with deaths and we have seen the deaths in the country have surpassed the 19,000 mark,” Buyeye said. The acting mayor added that the only reason that the city was seeing a second wave in coronavirus cases is due to non-compliance with current health and safety regulations. “People are not complying – in businesses, restaurants and social gatherings, they have thrown away their masks thinking that the virus is over. We are not happy at all with the current picture. We are warning residents that the second wave could be more deadly than the first wave if they do not change their ways.” Nelson Mandela Bay’s Disaster Management Chairperson Shane Brown said behavioural change was needed now more than ever, heading towards the festive season. “We would like to warn our residents that should the numbers continue to rise, President Cyril Ramaphosa will have no choice but to enforce stricter measures. The last thing we need is to lose control of the virus.” “People are infecting each other, we are heading towards the festive season and all around the world no one has experience on how to deal with this virus during the festive season. During the last festive season, it was only China that had Covid-19 cases. “We are faced with a crisis. We urge residents to stick to the regulations. Restaurants, shopping centres and businesses are not complying, we have engaged them and we will continue to preach compliance messages as this virus is better managed through preventative measures. The law enforcement agencies will also continue to enforce the law.” The NMB government’s comments follow similar sentiments from KwaZulu-Natal premier Sihle Zikalala, who also warned that a return to a hard lockdown is on the cards, unless the country sees a decline in the number of daily coronavirus cases. “Looking at the statistics, we can now safely say that we are definitely going back into a hard lockdown if there is no urgent and drastic change in behaviour,” the premier said. Ramaphosa on lockdown Speaking to parliament in an oral Q&A on Tuesday (27 October), president Cyril Ramaphosa dismissed ‘rumours’ that South Africa is returning to a hard lockdown – but said there are worrying trends related to Covid-19 infections, such as super spreader events. The president said that while no decision on a stricter lockdown has been made, the issue was not completely off the cards. He said he received a report on Covid-19 infections, and was still studying it – after which he would address the nation to talk about the situation and the way forward. “As South Africans we need to adhere to the measures that have been put to us by the medical advisory committee,” he said. “In the coming days…I will be able to address the people of South Africa about what we now need to do in the light of what we are going through,” he said. “I don’t want to be alarmist. The rumours that we are going to level 3 is simply not true. If we ever get there, I will be the one to advise the nation where we are, and where we are going to.” The address is expected some time this week. As of 1 November, South Africa has reported 1,371 new coronavirus cases, taking the total reported to 726,823. Deaths have reached 19,411 (a daily increase of 135), while recoveries have climbed to 655,330, leaving the country with a balance of 52,082 active cases. Read: Best and worst major medical aids in South Africa