Pick n Pay has launched its first set of online-only Black Friday deals for its customers across Gauteng and the Western Cape. The deals will offer over 40% off across various categories – including appliances, electronics, wine and beer, toiletries and household items, the retailer said. Pick n Pay said that the validity of the deals range from five days to the month of November, or until stocks last. New online-only deals will be added every couple of days until it launches its two-week Black Friday in-store deals later this month, which will also be available to shop online. John Bradshaw, retail executive: marketing at Pick n Pay, said the group is anticipating greater demand for online orders this Black Friday as more customers have turned to online shopping during lockdown. Over the past seven months, Pick n Pay Online reported a 200% increase in active customers, he said. “Customers are more confident and familiar with our online experience and we believe this will encourage even more customers to turn to online shopping this Black Friday. Many customers may also choose to avoid crowds at shopping centres.” He said that Pick n Pay’s online team has put in several preparations to provide customers with the best possible Black Friday online experience. “Pick n Pay Online is offering more deals over a longer period, and we’ve put in additional measures to keep the stock destined for online separate to stores so we can cater for the expected demand. “We have added more delivery slots during our Black Friday period so that customers can enjoy their purchases as early as the next day,” said Bradshaw. Pick n Pay said that some of the most popular online purchases last year included cleaning products, such as dishwashing liquid, everyday pantry items, such as milk, coffee and, sugar, and edible treats, such chocolates and biscuits. Customers also shopped for hi-tech items and appliances and Pick n Pay is expecting similar shopping patterns this year, said Bradshaw. You can find the full list of deals here. Read: Game’s latest Black Friday 2020 deals