The South African Social Security Agency (SASSA) has received complaints after it declined a number of  R350 grant applications. In a statement on Thursday (18 June), the agency said that these applications have been declined as they did not meet the criteria. “For one to qualify for the Covi-19 grant they must be either unemployed without any kind of income, or not receiving any kind of government assistance such as UIF and NSFAS, or social grants or any other financial support and must be above the age of 18,” it said. “The majority of declined applications are from people already on the UIF database or qualifying to receive it. In this case the applicants are advised to contact the Department of Employment and Labour to either apply for UIF or follow up with their applications. “SASSA verifies all applications by matching their data with other public and private databases to eliminate possibilities of double-dipping, so that only deserving applicants receive this financial aid.” SASSA chief executive officer Totsie Memela said the department is aware that this has caused unhappiness from applicants and thus it is important for beneficiaries to understand the criteria because this grant is not necessarily for everyone. “We are doing everything in our power to solve the matter and a dedicated email address and phone number have been made available to process complaints. “Those who feel aggrieved should either call 0800 60 10 11 or email srd@sassa.gov.za(link sends e-mail) with their complaints in order to access the recourse mechanism. Our aim is to pay the right grant to the right people,” Memela said. So far 3.2 million applicants have been approved and 1.2 million have been paid. Payments are still in progress and SASSA still needs to do a verification check before any payments can be done. Applicants are processed daily but the major source of delays come from the necessary verification process which SASSA has to do with other institutions which are dependencies in the value chain. The grant forms part of the R500 billion economic and social relief measures announced by President Cyril Ramaphosa last month. Applicants must be: Above the age of 18;
Unemployed;
Not receiving any income;
Not receiving any social grant;
Not receiving any unemployment insurance benefit and does not qualify to receive unemployment insurance benefits;
Not be receiving a stipend from the National Student Financial Aid Scheme; and
Not resident in a government funded or subsidised institution. Prospective applicants will need to provide the following compulsory information for processing of their applications: Identity Number;
Name and surname as captured in the ID (and initials);
Gender and disability;
Banking details – bank name and account number;
Contact details – cell phone number;
Residential address. Read: South Africa’s R200 billion coronavirus loan scheme isn’t working – here’s what happened