Curro Holdings, the JSE-listed independent education provider, has announced two senior appointments to further strengthen its executive team. “The group has identified several opportunities to expand organically and by way of acquisition. With this expansion, the focus on specific avenues has become more apparent and the need arose to further strengthen the executive team,” said Andries Greyling, chief executive officer (CEO) of Curro Holdings. Bernardt van der Linde, Curro’s chief financial officer (CFO) since 2011, has been promoted to executive: business operations, where he will lead growth initiatives. In his capacity as CFO, Van der Linde represented Curro on various boards and industry bodies. Under his leadership, Curro established its DigiEd schools model in Cape Town and Gauteng (where teachers and tutors provide one-on-one assistance to learners through classroom-based e-learning tools in videos), as well as the recently launched Curro Online, a fully online-based school curriculum for learners from Grade 4 to Grade 9. In addition, Van der Linde will lead Curro’s Select schools (acquisitions by the group), as well as developments within the group’s Information Technology and business improvement teams. “Bernardt has made a tremendous contribution to the group over the past few years; there is no doubt in my mind that under his leadership our new initiatives will grow from strength to strength,” said Greyling. Cobus Loubser, CEO of the Holdsport group, has been appointed to succeed Van der Linde as CFO of Curro Holdings as of January 2021. Loubser currently holds the position of CEO of Holdsport, a niche retail business incorporating Sportsmans Warehouse and Outdoor Warehouse. He was appointed to this role in 2018 after serving as the CFO from 2007. In his capacity as CFO, Loubser had wide-ranging responsibilities, including managing the 2011 listing and eventual delisting of Holdsport in 2017 when the group was acquired by Long4Life Limited, a lifestyle-focused business listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE). Loubser gained a Bachelor of Commerce Honours (Accounting) from the University of Stellenbosch and completed his articles with KPMG – qualifying as a CA (SA). Read: Here’s how much Curro’s new online school costs – with applications now open 