Stellenbosch University has launched the African Data Science Academy (ADSA). The academy, which forms part of the university’s School for Data Science and Computational Thinking, will develop and present open courses as well as bespoke courses developed for the data science industry and academic partners. “The African Data Science Academy is a way for the School for Data Science and Computational Thinking to build capacity in this area not just in South Africa and Africa, but across the world,” said Prof Kanshukan Rajaratnam, Director: School for Data Science and Computational Thinking. “ADSA does not just offer another online course, but adds value through interactions and with our presenters, and delegates have the opportunity find out how to apply the principles in their own fields.” Prof  Rajaratnam said that in July ADSA will be offering two accredited online short courses in partnership with the African Doctoral Academy at SU. Both courses will take place online from 20 to 24 July 2020. The first course is an ‘Introduction to Statistics with R’. R is a statistical software programme particularly powerful in data analysis and graphical representation. This course offers an introduction in the application of the programming language R to statistical analysis. The second course is an ‘Introduction to Data Science’. The short course is designed as an introductory overview to data science explained at the hand of the data science project life cycle. Prof Rajaratnam says that they have designed the short courses with “high-touch activities in mind,” such as reviews, quizzes, assignments and group work, as well as live or virtual and Q&A sessions with the course presenters. “The courses are taught by Stellenbosch University’s own world-class lecturers from the Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science (Introduction to Statistics with R) and from the Department of Industrial Engineering (Introduction to Data Science). “The fact that we are offering these courses online allows for students in any part of the world to take these courses and allows us to take Stellenbosch University’s world expert academics to the rest of the world,” Prof Rajaratnam said. You can find out more about the courses available here. Read: New website rules for South Africa during lockdown