The cumulative number of confirmed Covid-19 cases in South Africa breached the 100,000 mark on Monday (22 June) with the country nearing the grim milestone of 2,000 deaths. The Western Cape currently accounts for just over half of these reported cases (52,554), but the data shows that the number of reported cases in other provinces are beginning to spike as the peak approaches. “Some epidemiological models, including the National Covid-19 Epi Model (NCEM) which is relied on by the national government for forecasting, have estimated that the province will experience its peak soon,” said Western Cape premier Alan Winde. “While we cannot pinpoint the exact date at which we will reach this peak, we are experiencing increased pressure in our hospitals,” Winde said. This was further confirmed by Health minister Dr Zweli Mkhize who said that he expects the Western Cape’s coronavirus cases to peak sometime between the last week of June and the end of July. As of 22 June, Gauteng has reported 22% of cases in the country (22,341) while the Eastern Cape has reported 16.6% of total cases (16,895). The rising number of cases in South Africa is not unexpected, but comes at a time when the country is opening up its economy and further easing restrictions on movement under lockdown level 3. While this runs counter to World Health Organisation recommendations that lockdowns only be eased once countries show a decline in the number of new cases, health experts have said that the lockdown would provide no further benefit, and has effectively ‘flattened the curve’ in the country. The country’s economy is also at a point where it cannot afford an extended lockdown period. Government has indicated that it will assess 52 districts across the country at 14-day intervals to determine which areas need interventions to slow down the spread of the virus. Hotspots identified so far (where there are more than 5 cases per 100,000) largely comprise the country’s biggest metros. Western Cape The City of Cape Town accounts for more than 39,000 total infections, with Tygerberg, Khayelitsha and Klipfontein making up more than half of that total. Tygerberg (7,068 cases) is currently the hardest-hit district in the city followed by Khayelitsha (5,807 cases). The Western Cape’s data from 22 June shows the areas with the most cases.