Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) Nkosazana Clarice Dlamini-Zuma has published a new directive outlining the businesses that can reopen under the country’s advanced level 3 lockdown. The directive, published on Thursday evening (25 June), comes more than a week after president Cyril Ramaphosa announced that more businesses will be allowed to reopen. Notably, while the directive states that business sectors such as sit-down restaurants are allowed to open, it does not provide specific directions for their reopening. Instead, the gazette states that this information will be published in a directive at a later date ‘by the responsible cabinet minister’. A number of additional directives are also expected to provide further clarity around other sectors. Below are some of the most important changes for businesses and individuals. Leaving your home and exercise The directive states that a person may leave his or her place of residence to: Perform any service, as permitted under alert level 3; Travel to and from work; Buy goods or obtain services, as permitted under alert level 3; Move children, as allowed; Exercise between the hours of 06h00 to 18h00: Provided that the exercise is not done in organised groups of more than four people and adheres to health protocols and social distancing measures; Attend a place of worship in the same or another metropolitan area or district within the same province; Attend a school or learning institution, once these are opened; Travel for leisure purposes as allowed under Alert Level 3. Gatherings All gatherings are prohibited except a gathering at: A faith-based institution, which is limited to 50 persons or less, depending on the size of the place of worship. All health and safety protocols must also be met; A funeral (subject to regulations); A workplace for work purposes; Conferences and meetings, subject to a limitation of 50 persons, excluding those who participate through electronic platforms. These are limited to business purposes and must follow  all health and safety guidelines. Cinemas and theatres Cinemas can open subject to: A limitation of 50 persons or less;
Sale of tickets through a booking system; and
Strict adherence to all health protocols and social distancing measures as provided for in directions that must be issued by the responsible cabinet member. Theatres can open subject to: A limitation of 50 persons or less;
Strict adherence to all health protocols and social distancing measures as provided for in directions that must be issued by the responsible cabinet member.
Limitation on performers and crew to a maximum of 15 persons including live streaming or recording for distribution on digital platforms; Casinos Cinemas can open subject to: A restriction on the number of persons allowed in the casino to not more than 50% of the available floor space, with patrons observing a distance of least one and a half metres from each other. This percentage may be increased by the minister; Strict adherence to all health protocols and social distancing measures as provided for in directions that must be issued by the responsible cabinet member. Restaurants Restaurants are allowed to reopen subject to the strict adherence to all health protocols and social distancing measures as provided for in directions that must be issued by the responsible cabinet member, after consultation with the minister of health. On Thursday, Restaurants Association of South Africa chief executive officer, Wendy Alberts, called for the new regulations to allow restaurants to seat at 70% capacity and allow the consumption of alcohol on the premises. Areas which may not open The following ‘specific economic exclusions’ remain in place: On-site consumption of liquor; Short term home-sharing /letting /leasing /rental for leisure purposes; Domestic passenger air travel for leisure purposes, until directions with health protocols and social distancing measures are issued by the relevant Cabinet member responsible for transport; Passenger ships for leisure purposes; Sporting events, except as provided for in Chapter 4 of the Regulations; Exclusions relating to public transport services as set out in the directions issued by the Cabinet member responsible for transport; Exclusions relating to education services as set out in the directions issued by the Cabinet members responsible for education. Personal care services A week ago, minister of Small Business Development, Khumbudzo Ntshavheni, published a directive outlining the new guidelines for the personal care industry as part of South Africa’s revised level 3 lockdown rules. The directive stated that the following categories of services that are deemed safe to resume operations: Hairdressing;
Barbering;
Nail and toe treatment;
Facial treatment and make-up;
Body massage; and
Tattooing and body piercing. You can read the fill directive below.  Read: 118,375 confirmed coronavirus cases in South Africa as deaths climb to 2,292