The Department of Public Service and Administration has partnered with a number of higher education institutions to equip senior government officials with skills to fulfil their roles in the delivery of public services. Minister of Public Service and Administration Senzo Mchunu said that the institutions which will take part in the initiative include: University of the Free State (UFS);
North-West University;
University of Fort Hare;
University of the Western Cape;
Tshwane University of Technology. The partnership will enable the delivery of the Integrated Management Development Programme (IMDP) throughout the country, said Mchunu. The IMDP is a comprehensive professional development framework for public sector supervisors, managers and leaders. It promotes the application of sound management and leadership principles in a context of people-oriented development and service. The IMDP Model comprises four management and leadership development programmes for different target groups. The programmes are: The Foundation Management Development Programme is intended for administrators and first-line supervisors; The Emerging Management Development Programme targets emerging managers who are junior managers and supervisors; The Advanced Management Development Programme has been designed for middle managers and prepares them for basic challenges of senior management service; The Executive Development Programme (EDP), which is intended for senior managers, the chief directors and directors who are central in strategic decision making within public service departments and public sector institutions. “The partnership will greatly benefit the participants as it provides recognition of the acquired learning and opens up opportunities for further study in related fields,” said Mchunu. “The partnership will also benefit the communities that we serve because improved training for public servants means a more capable and professional public service for the public,” he said. Dr Lyndon du Plessis, head of the Department of Public Administration and Management at the University of the Free State, said UFS will provide management training at executive level through its Executive Development Programme (EDP), and on supervisory and middle-management level through the Emerging Management Development and Advanced Management Development programmes. This will be presented by the UFS Business School and the Department of Public Administration and Management. The latter will accredit the course content and ensure that experts are available to teach the course, he said. “It is a feather in the cap of the UFS and the Faculty of Economic and Management Sciences that it has been selected together with only four other higher education institutions to provide these programmes. “It is the continuation of a long-standing constructive relationship with government in an attempt to improve the quality of public sector management in South Africa, and the faculty is proud to be a role player in this key area.” You can read more about the programmes here. Read: Updated lockdown rules for South African schools – including matric exams, return to hostels and more