MyBroadband has launched a new online talk show – What’s Next with Aki Anastasiou – featuring interviews with South Africa’s industry leaders and top executives. The show, hosted by radio and TV personality Aki Anastasiou, focuses on the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on local business, and possible future outcomes. The first three episodes, which are now live, include conversations with venture capitalist and Montegray Capital founder Michael Jordaan, Vodacom chief executive officer, Shameel Joosub, and EOH CEO, Stephen van Coller. New episodes will be added regularly and will feature guests including Sygnia CEO Magda Wierzycka; Microsoft SA MD, Lillian Barnard; Liquid Telecom SA CEO, Reshaad Sha; and Afrihost CEO Gian Visser. The “What’s Next with Aki Anastasiou” interviews are available through multiple platforms: What’s Next with Aki Anastasiou show website
MyBroadband’s YouTube channel
MyBroadband’s Facebook page Individual articles for each interview will also be published with an embedded video to make it easy to keep track of new episodes. Episode 1: Michael Jordaan The first episode of the series features Montegray Capital foudner, Michael Jordaan, who discusses how the Covid-19 pandemic and subsequent lockdown has shaken things up for businesses he is invested in, including Rain and TymeBank. The pandemic has brought unprecedented demand on data services and adaptive technologies – for working from home and remote services – but has also changed the way businesses work. What’s next? Jordaan believes that businesses will find a balance between a new world of remote working and a return to normal office life. “Clearly there are people who just want to get back to the office…and there are certain things in meetings, like body cues and the like, that are an important part of doing business,” he said. “But what we’ve learned is that you don’t have to be there at eight o’clock in the morning, and stay in the office until five-thirty in the afternoon to do a decent day’s work.” He said businesses have learned they can save money on expensive retail costs, and workers have found they don’t have to spend their life in traffic, and can be productive at home. “I think we will end up with a mix of all of this,” he said. Jordaan, who describes himself as a venture capitalist, says that he has moved to a position where he finances entrepreneurs – but places a particular focus on business ideas that are building towards the future. He said that the best way to build for the future is to ensure that enterprises that have the vision and plans on how to get there are supported. You can listen to his insights below, and check out the What’s Next channels for discussions with other top executives and business leaders.  Read: The story behind Michael Jordaan’s decision to start Bank Zero