At the start of June the Department of Transport has published a directive which allows driving licence centres, registering authorities, testing stations and driving schools to resume services from 1 June. Motorists with expired licences also have a 90-day grace period from this date to apply for new documentation. However, both Johannesburg and the City of Cape Town have indicated that their licensing centres will not be fully operational from this date, and that not all services will be available. Below are the updated licensing centre details as of 15 June. Gauteng The City of Johannesburg has started the gradual reopening of its licencing centres, with approximately 58% of Gauteng Driving Licence Testing Centres (DLTCs) open as of 12 June. The city added that the renewal of drivers’ licences and the renewal of professional driving permits (PrDP) will be prioritised. The following centres across the region are now open: West Rand Kagiso
Krugersdorp Tshwane Akasia
Bronkhorstspruit
Centurion
Mabopane
Temba
Waltloo Ekurhuleni Alberton
Bedfordview
Benoni
Boksburg
Brakpan
Edenvale
Etwatwa
Germiston
Nigel
Kempton Park
Springs
Tsakane Johannesburg Kliptown
Maponya Mall
Sandton
Xavier Sedibeng Heidelberg Our resumption plan seeks to address the backlog in respect of licensing services, which has arisen due to the Country being in a state of lockdown. Services rendered by the MVRAs and DLTCs will be limited since we will be working with a third of our staff members,” said the city’s Mally Mokoena. “The work to be prioritised will be limited to the registration of vehicles and the renewal of motor vehicle licences discs for vehicles which expired a month prior the implementation of the lockdown up to the month of the termination of the lockdown, on a first-come-first-served basis.” Cape Town The City of Cape Town’s Traffic Service said it will reopen its last seven DLTCs on Wednesday 17 June 2020. The city also advised clients as follows: Hours of operation are 08:30 -14:30 until further notice, to allow for the screening of staff before and after the workday; Given the risk of COVID-19 transmission, there is a risk that a centre might have to close at short notice for decontamination where exposure to the virus has been confirmed; The DLTCs will be cleaned in accordance with stipulated regulations for City buildings before the facility is reopened to the public; Only certain services are available until further notice, i.e. previously booked tests for learner and driving licences and licence card collections. No new bookings will be accepted until further notice. The DLTCs are contacting applicants directly to reschedule appointments for those that were previously booked on the system. The DLTCs are also doing renewals of expired driving licence cards and PrDPs. “Persons who are waiting to collect their new driving licence cards are being contacted telephonically to collect these documents if they are ready for collection,” the city said. Read: A 30 km/h speed limit near schools – and 8 other calls to make roads safer in South Africa