Rugged SA (PTY) Ltd is best known as the leader in distributing robust and rugged devices throughout Africa. However, they are currently showing their interest in the current global educational crisis which forces millions of students world-wide to start learning from home. As this is a forced and rather unforeseen circumstance drastic measures have been made for students to do schoolwork from within their own homes. Click here to get Rugged SA laptops and tablets ideal for e-learning purposes. Students are expected to making use of independent technology to maximise their educational efforts during this time. Rugged SA is one company who sees how the current situation can affect individuals, schools, colleges, universities, and other independent educational institutions. Therefore, they offer technological solutions to increase the availability of technology available to these individuals and institutions. They are already supplying different areas of the Department of Education and continue to penetrate and fulfil the need for technology in this sector. Rugged SA’s focus is primarily on the tablet industry as this device can be utiliaed as a mobile device and double-up as a laptop when connected with a wireless keyboard. However, they do offer standard laptops for home use as well. Rugged SA features tablets and laptops specifically selected and tested for the educational industry keeping in mind affordability as well as seamless usability and functionality. Their signature range of educational tablets ‘EduTab’ is available from R3,999 which is a semi-rugged tablet that boasts a water and dust resistant rating of IP54 making it perfect for students. They also offer Lenovo and Huawei tablets priced from R3,699 with local stock available. They also offer a 6-inch Android Blackview BV6100 Rugged ‘Phablet’ which might just be the perfect size between a phone and a tablet. All their devices are Google Certified enabling them to support the most need apps which includes Google, Google Play, Google Chrome, DropBox, Zoom, Whatsapp, and more. Contact Rugged SA today to ensure the future of education IS IN YOUR HANDS! Website: https://ruggedsa.co.za/collections/edutab-educational-tablets
Email: sales@ruggedsa.co.za
Phone: 010 020 5540 This article was published in partnership with Rugged SA.