Samsung’s cutting-edge QLED TVs are a favourite among customers who are seeking the best picture quality possible on a modern TV. The QLED TV range is the culmination of years of display evolution and is headlined by the top-of-the-line QLED Q900R, which boasts an 8K resolution with HDR support and a 98-inch panel. 8K QLED delivers 16-times the resolution of Full HD, boasting 33 million pixels and an image quality unlike any other product on the market. Click here to learn more about Samsung QLED technology Furthermore, Samsung’s QLED TV range is powered by the company’s intelligent Quantum processor, which can automatically optimise screen brightness and TV sound control to any viewing condition and content. QLED technology uses quantum dots embedded in the display to provide enhanced brightness levels compared to other TV technologies, as well as higher contrast ratios and greater colour ranges. Quantum dots are finely-tuned particles that can express real colours at 100% colour volume. The technology delivers support for Quantum HDR, which provides the ability to play HDR video at up to 8K resolutions. When paired with the advanced Direct Full Array backlighting technology on Samsung QLED TVs, Quantum Dot technology offers deeper blacks, less light blooming, and a more profound depth of detail by controlling the backlight in each zone to add depth and detail. Additionally, QLED TVs don’t use organic elements – which means they are essentially immune to screen burn-in. This is a display issue in which certain facets of an image shown on a TV screen for an extended period affect the display and how it displays images and video. Samsung has ensured that its high-end QLED TV range will not suffer this issue. The intelligent Quantum processor built into Samsung QLED TVs adapts brightness, depth, and sound control in real-time to perfectly suit your viewing environment. In addition to supporting 8K content, Samsung’s QLED TVs allow you to enjoy a range of non-8K content at 8K resolution thanks to its AI upscaling technology. Powered by the Quantum processor, AI upscaling analyzes and upscales every scene you watch, no matter what kind of content you are viewing. Data from millions of videos is used to classify aspects like textures and edges, and to optimally upscale each specific scene, in this scenario. Additionally, viewers who are watching content on one of Samsung’s 4K QLED TVs will also benefit from the image and audio enhancements delivered by its Quantum Dot technology. This suite of video enhancements, paired with the ability to upscale content dynamically and unparalleled colour depth and quality, makes Samsung’s QLED TVs the first choice for buyers looking for the best-quality TV on the market. This article was published in partnership with Samsung.