Many parents of school learners may have been caught unaware by the sudden need to shift to remote learning as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. While the ability to learn online is greater than ever before, leaners must be equipped with the appropriate tools to work efficiently. Click here to view the extensive range of ASUS products ideal for online learning. Many parents now find themselves in an unfamiliar position – having to keep their children in front of the computer screen and away from distractions around the house. New home-learners may find it challenging to find a quiet, comfortable workspace with room for everything they need to attend class and complete their tasks. ASUS offers a selection of products to help parents improve their children’s ability to learn from home, especially in environments that weren’t necessarily intended to be used as working spaces. With video calling and online meetings as the order of the day, it is essential that learners are able to hear and speak with clear audio when communicating with their teachers and classmates. The ROG Strix Go 2.4 wireless headset comes with an AI noise-cancelling microphone which eliminates background sounds such as people watching TV or cleaning the house, so the learner will be able to use it in noisy environments. It boasts up to 25 hours of battery life per charge and works at a range of 20 metres, so kids will be able to follow lessons while grabbing some lunch or pouring themselves a drink. With a lightweight design and memory foam ear cups, it is comfortable to wear for the duration of online classes. Learners may also find it useful to have a multi-display setup which allows for improved multi-tasking. For example, on one screen they can view the video feed from their teacher which may include presentations and important module material, while an additional display can be used for a full view of their notes. However, having two monitors instead of one can take up copious amounts of valuable desk space. The MB16AC is ideal for expanding display real estate without sacrificing too much physical work space. It can be powered via a single USB-C connection, so they won’t need an extra plug to get it going. It also supports both horizontal and vertical orientation for a variety of use cases. Where space and power supply are no issue, learners may opt for the ASUS VZ239HE, an ultra-thin 23-inch monitor with a 178-degree viewing angle. Both these monitors feature ASUS Eye Care technology with TUV Rhineland-certified flicker-free backlighting and a blue light filter. This will minimize eye fatigue as learners are required to observe their screens for long periods throughout the school day. Students are also going to spend plenty of time typing while writing up their assignments, completing online tests and communicating with their teachers via text messages and email. The ROG Strix Scope TKL Deluxe keyboard boasts a compact form factor which makes it ideal for use while leaving plenty of room for paperwork and study material on the desk or table. The keys employ premium-quality Cherry MX switches made in Germany. These are renowned for offering optimal actuation and responsiveness with every keystroke, which means your kids will likely waste less time retyping their work. To keep the workspace as clean as possible, a wireless mouse comes highly recommended. The ROG Pugio II with dual-wireless capability for 2.4GHz and Bluetooth connectivity comes with up to 100 hours of battery life, which means it only has to be charged every few days. Its 16,000 dpi, 400 IPS optical sensor delivers exceptional performance for precision navigation and will get the job done quickly. Key to perfecting a learning setup is the ability to stay connected and work efficiently on online platforms. Parents will therefore need to ensure their kids can connect to the Internet via a router that provides fast and reliable connectivity. The RT-AX58U AX3000 supports the latest Wi-Fi standard – Wi-Fi 6 – and uses Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiple Access (OFDMA) and Multi-User Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MU-MIMO) technologies. The 2×2 dual-band router boasts a total network speed capacity of up to 3,000Mbps – 2.5 times faster than standard 2×2 dual-band routers. With these features, it is more than capable of supporting the demands of the video and audio streaming services used in online learning. With these powerful tools from ASUS you will be able to quickly roll out a remote learning station for the school kids in your household with minimal disruption to your living situation. Their compact designs also make these products easy to put away if you need to use the same space for other purposes during the hours when they are no longer working. Click here to find these and other great products from ASUS. This article was published in partnership with ASUS.