Virgin Active has launched new online personal training programmes for its members. The group said that members can choose between 4-week and an 8-week programme or purchase individual sessions. It added that each programme will begin with a detailed consultation, a tailored exercise programme based on your unique personal circumstances as well as weekly check-ins between you and your personal trainer. “When you buy a package, you’ll be asked a few questions that will allow us to pair you with the best personal trainer for you. Certified via accredited training institutions, our personal trainer’s are fitness experts with the knowledge and skills to design safe, effective training programmes. “You decide on a digital platform that suits you best e.g. Zoom, WhatsAapp , Skype, Microsoft Teams etc.” Costs for the programmes are as follows: 4-week programme – R650;
8-week programme – R1,100;
Individual sessions – from R185/session. You can read more about the specifics of each programme here. Virgin Active said that its members also have free access to coaches which features hundreds of on-demand workouts, live classes and talks for all fitness goals led by top instructors from around the world. South Africa’s gyms and sporting facilities are prohibited from opening under the country’s level 3 lockdown regulations, with no indication provided as to when they might open. Reopening of gyms Speaking to MyBroadband, Virgin Active said that government is yet to provide guidelines that it must follow, but it expects some level of restrictions or conditions imposed upon it. “Until we have a date from the government and know what their requirements are, we are prepping for all possible scenarios,” said Virgin Active. If necessary, Virgin Active has prepared the capability to use a “book your slot” system, which would require members to book their gym sessions in advance. Planet Fitness said that it is also working on plans to reopen its facilities. “Planet Fitness is working around the clock to adhere to government protocol around exercise and social distancing to ensure that when day one comes, we are ready to open and it will be safe to do so,” Planet Fitness told MyBroadband. Planet Fitness said that it put in place several measures before the lockdown officially begun to ensure that its members were safe. These included removing certain equipment from the floor and reducing the number of people allowed in the gym at any one time. You can read more about the plan to open gyms here. Read: Scammers pushing new ‘Ponzi’ scheme over WhatsApp in South Africa