With winter in full swing in South Africa, keeping your home or office space warm is essential to not only staying comfortable, but protecting your health. An air conditioner is one of the most effective ways to regulate the temperature inside your house or workplace – whether you need it to be warmer or cooler. Click here to learn more about Samsung air conditioners. Samsung’s wide range of air conditioners available in South Africa provide excellent performance and reliability for this purpose. This makes them ideal for not only cooling your living areas down during summer, but also warming things up in the of winter months. Samsung air conditioners ensure that room temperatures remain regulated according to your preferences. Whether your require heating or cooling, it is also important that the airflow of your air conditioner is optimised. Samsung’s Wind-Free Cooling technology is designed to gently disperse air through 23,000 micro air holes so that you do not have to feel wind blowing onto you. It’s further designed to cool or heat wide and large areas, meaning the temperature of your entire room can be managed easily. Good Sleep mode is another innovation that automatically manages the temperature of your room while you are sleeping to optimise the various stages of your sleep cycle. While air conditioners are typically bad news in the energy efficiency department, Samsung truly sets itself apart from competitors in this area. Samsung air conditioners use less electricity than its rivals and are therefore perfect for the South African customer. The air conditioners employ energy saving techniques to reduce power consumption – saving their owners money. The digital inverter 8-pole used by Samsung consumes only 32% of the energy used by conventional air conditioners. It also maintains the desired temperature without the need to turn the air conditioner on and off – meaning there is less power fluctuation in the home. Another consideration when purchasing an air conditioner is the quality of the air it is emitting – an even more important factor in winter. Samsung aircons use high-quality filters to keep your air fresh and the inside of the unit clean. As well as capturing dust, its unique coating may eliminate certain kinds of viruses, bacteria, and allergens as they pass through its dense filter mesh. Additionally, the High Density filter is washable, meaning that you can clean it manually to continue breathing clean air. To learn more about Samsung’s range of air conditioners, click here. This article was published in partnership with Samsung.