The City of Cape Town has opened more motor vehicle licensing offices across the metro, but is encouraging customers to rather make use of the online service offerings to pay accounts and to renew motor vehicle licenses where possible. These centres are also operating with a reduced number of staff to adhere with the national lockdown regulations, it said in a statement on Monday (29 June). Customers visiting these centres should know the following: Covid-19 screening at the entrances
Limited number of customers allowed in at a time;
Social distancing is required and must be adhered to;
Limited daily transactions, please visit early in the day. Ticket numbers are issued and if a service limit is reached for the day, bring the same ticket number with you the next day if possible;
Longer queues due to reduced staff;
Only your ID is needed for motor vehicle licensing and registration renewals. The city noted that motorists who applied before 26 March 2020 and meet all the requirements will still receive their discs. It added that motorists who applied after 26 March 2020 would need to reapply online. In line with transport regulations, the validity period for the renewal of a motor trade number license has been extended for a further six months from 1 June 2020. This means that they will remain valid until 31 August. You can find a full list of operating times and open centres here. As of 30 June, the following offices were open: Somerset West
Manenberg
Milnerton
Pinelands
Bellville
Fish Hoek
Strandfontein
Cape Town Civic Centre
Parow
Kuils River
Liberty Promenade Mall, Mitchells Plain
Table Bay Mall
Plumstead
Strand
Wesfleur
Lentegeur
Atlantis, Avondale Gauteng The City of Johannesburg says it has started the gradual reopening of its licencing centres. The latest available information shows that approximately two-thirds of Gauteng Driving Licence Testing Centres (DLTCs) are open as of 22 June. The city added that the renewal of drivers’ licences and the renewal of professional driving permits (PrDP) will be prioritised. The following centres across the region are now open: West Rand Kagiso
Krugersdorp Tshwane Akasia
Bronkhorstspruit
Centurion
Mabopane
Temba
Waltloo Ekurhuleni Alberton
Bedfordview
Benoni
Boksburg
Brakpan
Edenvale
Etwatwa
Germiston
Nigel
Kempton Park
Springs
Tsakane Johannesburg Kliptown
Maponya Mall
Sandton
Xavier
Randburg
Langlaagte
Florida Sedibeng Heidelberg Read: We don’t want to start a fight with taxis: Mbalula