Avo, the Super App by Nedbank, is now available to all South Africans, no matter who you bank with. The group launched the Super App in phases, starting with Nedbank staff, expanding to Nedbank clients via the Nedbank money app, and finally a full release to South Africa. Click here to learn more about Nedbank’s Super App Avo. The digital platform is dubbed a Super App because it negates the need for multiple apps by offering many customer or business needs, in one app, running off a single bank grade sign-on, innovative digital wallet and rewards program – with exciting Avo Points. Since South Africa moved into level 3 lockdown, Avo expanded its product offering to include liquor deliveries and weekly deals on its e-shop alongside the existing key offerings: Online groceries – customers can shop from leading grocery retailers all in one basket, and have it delivered for free.
Find a professional home service provider – Avo matches customers with the right professional for whatever home services they need, and protects the transaction with the innovative payment reservation feature.
Prepaid top-ups and payments – Customers can top up their data, airtime and electricity on the go, as well as pay friends and family. Fast, convenient and secure.
Digital home entertainment – Avo customers can access and purchase vouchers to a variety of digital subscriptions for music, movies and games.
Avo rewards for most transactions – Customers earn 1% in Avo Points when transacting. Points can be spent in Avo on everything from products to groceries and even home services. Described as a first on the African continent, Avo is set to revolutionise the way South Africans shop and sell. Avo Business, the counterpart app to Avo, has also launched and is readily signing-up home services-based businesses nationwide to serve Avo customers. “Banks today have an opportunity, and a responsibility, to do far more for their customers than merely provide financial services,” said, Ciko Thomas, Managing Executive: Retail and Business Banking at Nedbank Group. “So, for us at Nedbank, that capacity to add massive value to every aspect of a person’s life or business is what makes a platform ecosystem really worthwhile,” he adds. Avo is now available on an innovative web application, and on app through Google Play and the App Store. For convenience, Nedbank clients can sign up simply through the Nedbank money app. Click here to learn more about Nedbank’s Super App Avo. This article was published in partnership with Nedbank.