The V&A Waterfront has launched a new drive-through pick-up option for shoppers seeking to avoid crowds during the ongoing coronavirus pandemic. The service, offered in partnership with delivery company Pargo, will allow shoppers to complete their shopping online and then collect their purchases at a drive-through collection point once they are ready. “The easy-to-use service allows you to enjoy shopping at all your favourite participating stores, with the added advantage of an efficient and speedy drive-through collection service,” the V&A Waterfront said. “Skip the queues, maintain your social distance and have full control over your shopping experience when you browse, order and pay online. “Pargo’s smart Logistics technology will track your purchase and notify you when the parcel is at the pickup point. Simply collect at a time that is convenient for you.” A number of major retailers are participating in the project. including: @Home;
Cape Union Mart;
Hi Store;
Markham;
Old Khaki;
Sportscene
Total Sports. A number of major South African retailers have also begun offering pick-up and delivery services as the come to grips with the coronavirus pandemic. In April, Woolworths launched a new contactless drive-through service, allowing shoppers to order online and collect without leaving their car. The group said that its first trial of the service was officially held at its Durbanville Food Store over the Easter weekend. “During these last few weeks, we have been focused on putting in place all the necessary precautions to safeguard the well-being of our customers and employees during the Covid-19 pandemic,” said Liz Hillock, head of Online and Mobile at Woolworths. “We have seen an unprecedented increase in demand for our online offering during this crisis. Since the start of the lockdown we’ve increased our capacity by over 50% but demand remains sky-high.” Pick n Pay also launched a ‘collect direct’ email ordering service for over 174 of its franchise stores during the lockdown period. The group said that customers will be able to select from over 260 products, ranging from fresh produce to household items, and email their shopping list directly to their nearest participating Pick n Pay store for collection. The store will then communicate directly with the customer to confirm the order, and when it will be ready for collection. Pick n pay said that the collect direct email ordering service is available at selected stores in the Western Cape, Eastern Cape, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Free State, Limpopo, Mpumalanga and North West. You can find a full list of the participating stores and more information about the ordering process here. Read: Edgars on the auction block after 91 years of South African trading