Nedbank Corporate and Investment Banking (CIB) has opened applications for its graduate programme. The programme is designed to attract, develop, retain and grow the very best graduates, primarily from previously disadvantaged groups, said senior lead: Talent and Acquisition at Nedbank CIB, Pam Ramauthar. She added that the bank is looking to build a strong talent pipeline of dynamic young professionals who can deliver scarce skills, contribute to our business strategies, and drive the transformation of business and industry “To deliver on this commitment the Nedbank CIB Graduate Programme gives graduates the opportunity to kickstart their career at one of South Africa’s leading financial institutions. “They also receive extensive exposure to theoretical and practical training in a diversity of fields – all while being coached and mentored by industry experts with proven track records in mergers and acquisitions, private equity, corporate finance and a host of other specialised financial fields,” said Ramauthar. Ramauthar said that qualifying graduates are employed as full-time Nedbank staff members, with all the accompanying employee benefits, for the duration of the programme. Successful candidates will participate in a six-week investment banking foundational programme, presented by an international service provider, before embarking on an 18-month programme that helps them hone their skills in everything from investment banking disciplines and fintech trends to personal leadership and design-thinking methodology. The top-performing participants will also get to travel to two international destinations, and gain valuable African and global work and industry experience. How to apply Nedbank said that they are looking for candidates with the following qualifications: Computer science (data-driven disciplines);
Engineering (core focus on computer, software and information security engineering);
Quantitative analytics;
Financial engineering. Applications open on 24 June and officially close on 31 July 2020. You can find out more about applying here. Read: African Bank warns over increase in defaults on loans amid Covid-19 pandemic