DStv has warned that scammers are using various tactics to either defraud customers of their money or to get customers’ personal information. The group said that these scams typically target customers on social media or through SMSes, asking customers to hand over your personal information to anyone claiming to be from DStv. DStv said that some of the most common scams being used include: Phishing/Gift card scam – Customers receive an email informing them that they’ve won a cash gift card or huge sums of prize money from a MultiChoice competition or that they’re being rewarded huge sums of money for being loyal DStv customers. The email then asks the customer to provide their personal details in order to claim the prize; Final notice scam – Some DStv customers have received an SMS claiming to be from DStv demanding payment for a DStv Explora account. It threatens action if payment is not made today and includes banking details. This SMS is not from DStv. The group asked customers to not make payments into any bank account or through any link supplied; Social media posts recruiting for MultiChoice – The group said there are dangerous scams disguised as recruitment ads for MultiChoice. It noted that one supplier, which recruits on its behalf, Afrizan, does use Facebook and Twitter to advertise roles. Every advert has a reference number which can be verified against opportunities posted to the Afrizan website. Neither MultiChoice nor its suppliers will ever offer to drive you to an interview; DStv Premium upgrade scam – Scammers are approaching customers offering them DStv Premium upgrades. They offer DStv Premium for a fixed one-off fee per year where the customer pays the fee directly to the scammer. The group said you can upgrade your DStv account online at any time, and said you should not believe anyone claiming to upgrade your account on your behalf. Payments are made directly to MultiChoice. DStv installation scam – Scammers posing as DStv accredited installers are offering customers unrealistic DStv services like free package upgrades or free DStv for life for a minimal once off fee. DStv offers six subscription packages that you can choose from. If someone offers you a discounted DStv subscription at a once off payment, treat this with suspicion and check it with the group. “While some scams are difficult to identify, there are usually tell-tale signs that can help you spot if something is a scam,” DStv said. “Like receiving an email or SMS from us claiming that you’ve won a huge prize for a DStv competition you never entered and for which you must either pay a fee or verify yourself by sending your personal details – sounds too good to be true? It probably is.” MultiChoice said it will never request your personal details via email or SMS – please do not hand over your personal information to anyone claiming to be from DStv. “Also, do not make payments directly to an individual claiming they are from MultiChoice or DStv – use one of our direct platforms to make your payments to your DStv account.” Read: Showmax adds live news channels