Eskom will implement load reduction in Gauteng to avoid network overloading from 17h00 until 22h00 on Thursday (18 June), it said in a statement. The embattled power utility said that that this will include strategically switching off power in the following areas. Soweto Chiawelo;
Dlamini;
Jabavu;
Central Wester Jabavu;
Jabulani;
Klipspruit;
Mofolo Central;
Mofolo North;
Mofolo South;
Molapo;
Moroka;
Moroka North;
Orlando Ekhaya;
Orlando West;
, Pimville Zones 1-7;
Pimville Zone 9;
Senaoane. The West Rand Chamdor;
Kagiso;
Rietvallei;
Luipaardsvlei;
Sinqobile;
Witpoortjie;
Vaal Evaton Central;
Evaton North;
Evaton Small Farms;
Evaton West;
Lakeside. The Vaal Evaton Central;
Evaton North;
Evaton Small Farms;
Evaton West;
Lakeside. It should be noted that these power cuts are not classified as ‘load shedding’ but is instead defined as ‘load reduction’. Load shedding is scheduled nationally, while load reduction are strategic cuts in specific areas that are overloaded. At the start of June, Eskom chief executive officer Andre de Ruyter said that the coronavirus lockdown has led to a direct decline in electricity usage in the country. He added that there has been a clear increase in electricity usage since the move to level 4 lockdown. De Ruyter said that the lockdown also provided Eskom with an opportunity to conduct maintenance on its plants, with the power utility’s new base scenario shifting from an envisaged 31 days of stage 1 load shedding to just three days during the winter period. However, De Ruyter stressed that Eskom’s systems are still unpredictable. “It is important to recognise that due to the unreliability and unpredictability of the system, the risk of load shedding remains,” he said. “This will be the reality until after the 18 months of reliability maintenance, which will last until August 2021.” Eskom said that the current outlook is three days of stage 1 (1,000 MW) load shedding during the month of July where the demand is forecast to be approximately 33,600 MW should the power utility be in a position to limit the unplanned breakdowns and system losses to below 11,000 MW. Read: Here is the expected petrol price for July