Microsoft’s Office 2010 software suite will no longer receive support from Microsoft as of 13 October 2020, and it its recommended that you start considering your Office package upgrades now. While you will still be able to use this software, it will no longer receive security updates – putting your digital well-being at significant risk. Office 2010, like most of Microsoft’s products, has a support lifecycle during which they provide support such as security patches and bug fixes. The support lifecycle on Office 2010 was set at 10 years. This lifecycle is known as the product’s end of support. Come 13 October this year, this means that vulnerabilities and security risks increase, and bug fixes and technical support will no longer be provided. This is why you should consider upgrading to the new Microsoft 365 Business Standard – formerly known as Office 365 Business Premium – which provides you with up-to-date versions of your favourite Microsoft Office programmes and so much more. Click here to learn more about how Microsoft 365 can help you. Microsoft 365 Business Standard offers the latest premium versions of Microsoft Word, Excel, and PowerPoint – all of which include built-in intelligence to optimise your documents. With Microsoft 365, you can also co-author documents, get real-time data, or even dictate into your documents. The collaboration and sharing of data is also significantly easier with Microsoft 365 because you can use the web version of Office for free – which lets you make edits and provide feedback on documents in real time. While Office 2010 may still service your needs, it has not been updated for almost 10 years – and in this time, the various Office programs have been improved and optimised. By purchasing the new Microsoft 365 Business Standard, not only will you get the updated versions of these programs – they will remain up-to-date because as Microsoft releases new features and tools, you will receive them. Impressively, with Microsoft 365 Business Standard you can get the full Office experience across a range of devices – including PCs, Macs, tablets, and even mobile devices. This means that you can create, edit, or view documents on the go, and regardless of which device you have available or work from. Microsoft prides itself on offering advance security for all devices that use its Microsoft 365 Business Standard products, so you can rest assured that your documents are well-protected. While the benefits of Microsoft 365 Business Standard’s online and cloud integration are far-reaching, a common misconception is that you will need to be online whenever you want to use the Microsoft 365 Office suite. When you activate your new Microsoft 365 Business Standard licence, you will download, install, and activate the latest Office suite. From this point on, you will be able to use them even when you are offline – just as you would with previous, non-365 versions of Office. However, it is recommended that you connect to the Internet regularly to ensure your version of Office remains up-to-date with the latest fixes and upgrades. It must be noted that if you do not connect to the Internet for 31 days, the applications will go into reduced functionality mode until you reconnect to the Internet. Microsoft Office dominates the market for good reason, and the Microsoft 365 Business Standard product is the best version of Office yet, which come with these desktop versions of Office apps: Outlook, Word, Excel, PowerPoint, OneNote (plus Access and Publisher for PC only).
Host email with a 50 GB mailbox and custom email domain.
Create a hub for teamwork and collaboration with Microsoft Teams
Store and share files with 1 TB of OneDrive cloud storage per user
Use one license to cover fully installed, Office apps on five mobile devices, five tablets, and five PCs or Macs per user
Get help anytime with around-the-clock phone and web support from Microsoft To learn more about how Microsoft 365 Business Standard can help you, or to discuss your needs with a specialist, click here or email Pinnacle on: microsoft@pinnacle.co.za This article was published in partnership with Pinnacle.