Health minister Dr Zweli Mkhize has announced that South Africa now has 76,334 confirmed cases of coronavirus. This is up by ‬ 2,801 cases from the 73,533 infections on Tuesday, while the highest daily record of 4,302 new cases was reported on Sunday. The minister announced 57 new deaths, taking the total up to 1,625, and a mortality rate of 2.1%, while recoveries increased to 42,063, which translates to a recovery rate of 55.1%. The minister said that 44 casualties are in the Western Cape, 9 from the Eastern Cape, and 4 from KwZulu-Natal. A total of 1 148 933 tests have been conducted to date, with 26,975 over the past 24 hours, the minister said.  Globally, coronavirus cases topped 8.26 million on Wednesday, while deaths have exceeded 446,000 and 4.3 million recoveries have been reported A low-cost anti-inflammatory drug is the first treatment shown to improve survival in patients with Covid-19, University of Oxford researchers said. Bloomberg reported that deaths in patients who needed assistance to breathe were lower over a period of four weeks when they got an anti-inflammatory called dexamethasone than among those who received standard care, the researchers said Tuesday in an emailed statement. The study was stopped early because of the important preliminary results. Meanwhile, a Covid-19 vaccine candidate that is under development by Sinopharm’s Wuhan Institute of Biological Products Co has shown no serious adverse reactions during phase I/II clinical trials, according to a post on the company’s official Weibo page, as reported by Bloomberg. Youth day President Cyril Ramaphosa has encouraged the youth to work with government in creating an inclusive economy that will rid South Africa of inequality, poverty and unemployment. “There has to be life beyond Covid-19. We are looking forward to creativity, innovation and new ideas from young people and we want young people who are going to speak out and step forward,” the president said. President Ramaphosa on Tuesday participated in an interactive panel session with young people as part of the virtual Youth Day commemorations. Youth Day pays tribute to the school pupils who lost their lives during the 16 June 1976 uprising in Soweto. This year’s Youth Month coincides with the 30th anniversary of the release of Nelson Mandela and takes place under the theme: “Youth Power; Growing South Africa Together in the Period of Covid-19”. The president challenged the youth find opportunities post-Covid-19. “Covid-19 is pregnant with opportunities so I am challenging young people to see that post Covid-19 is a new platform. We need to set up different ways of running our economy, of the ownership of economy and managing our economy and production. “Technology is going to underpin nearly everything that we are going to do, this is ushering in a new digital society,” he said. The president also encouraged young people to produce products. “That is how we want to grow our economy, as government we need to find those gems and invest in them. I want businesses to be helped and supported.” Read: The new tax case all South Africans should know about