Home education provider, Impaq, which boasts over 21,000 learners, is launching free Grade R-9 online classes at a time when there are growing concerns around the safety of children at schools amid the Covid-19 outbreak. It says that these live-streamed, CAPS-aligned classes will help learners continue learning from the safety and comfort of their homes for the duration of the lockdown, and they will be hosted by top teachers and facilitators. There will also be regular classes for Grade 10-12 learners. The classes cover subjects ranging from English to Mathematics, isiZulu, Natural Sciences and many more. The way it works is that parents and learners can view a timetable on the online schooling link on the Impaq website. From here, they will be able to find the grade and subjects that they want to do classes in, and then select the time and schedule of the next live session. If learners miss a live session, they can still watch a recorded version of the class afterward. Curriculum alignment While Grade 12s and Grade 7s started returning to schools last week, the Department of Basic Education has said that parents are within their rights not to send their children back to school immediately this year if they have any concerns over their health. The department has also said that schools cannot deregister any child for this reason. As a result, many parents across the country are seriously considering continuing schooling from their own homes for the remainder of 2020 and even beyond. Impaq said it has decided to extend a helping hand to these parents and learners by offering this support in the form of its free online classes. Impaq’s approach and comprehensive support around homeschooling can help make the transition for these parents easier. For parents who are considering a more permanent home education setup, Impaq said it follows a CAPS-aligned curriculum to ensure that learners can easily return to a traditional school sometime in the future without missing a step. For working parents, Impaq is especially helpful as it provides children with a structured learning plan at home as well as partnerships with hundreds of independent tutors across the country. Impaq also provides study materials and assessments. Learners who use Impaq’s solutions also fall under the South African Comprehensive Assessment Institute (SACAI), which is an examination body overseen by Umalusi. On completion of Grade 12, learners receive a NSC certificate that will enable them to apply to tertiary institutions, such as universities, should they decide to do so. In addition, Optimi Campus, which is affiliated with Impaq, provides home education learners in the FET phase (Grade 10 – Grade 12) with further support and more of an in-depth approach to learning that includes smaller classes and individual attention. The campus is situated in the Lynnwood area in Pretoria. “Learning and working from home has become part of our new normal. But with this has come further challenges in terms of ensuring that children don’t miss out on learning. We believe that Impaq can help hugely in this regard, and that our free online schooling will go a long way in providing parents and learners with that extra guidance that they may need,” said Louise Schoonwinkel, managing director of Optimi Home. Read: Here’s how much Curro’s new online school costs – with applications now open