NEC XON is using the NeoFace Watch facial recognition platform and specialised thermography cameras that include optical lenses to measure skin temperature and visually identify employees and visitors to its premises. The commercially-available solution digitises the processes around reporting and managing Covid-19, employee and visitor health and safety, and provides businesses with a compliant, automated system for contact tracing. Click here for more information from NEC XON “Employee and visitor safety is a priority for many organisations now, particularly at this time,” said Eugene Le Roux, Chief Executive for Africa at NEC XON. “It’s now law under the Disaster Management Act to wear a mask at all times when in a public place, such as an office building, as well as to manage the numbers of employees and visitors on the premises at any given time. This solution was designed to automate that process with the necessary alerts sent directly to the company’s pandemic management and response team so that we are always informed and can act immediately and from an informed basis, should we need to.” The system registers people visually as they enter the premises, accurately identifies them against the employee database even while they are wearing their masks, or links their picture to their identity if they are a visitor. Once connected to the Wi-Fi on premises, it automatically sends a digital Covid-19 questionnaire to their phone and stores the answers in the database. Having performed all three parts of the process, it then grants them access to the premises. You can see it in action in the video below  Once on the premises, NEC XON performs behaviour analysis like mask detection and social distancing on the platform to ensure compliance in its building. It also monitors the number of people on premises and flags alerts to appropriate people at specified thresholds so that the responsible team can fully manage the environment. “Employees can also pre-register expected visitors on the system to speed up the entry process in addition to gaining the digitised automation and compliance capabilities,” said Jannie Erasmus, Business Unit Head of Surveillance and Analytics at NEC XON. “The solution is fully POPI-compliant and the platform is based on NeoFace Watch, which was developed in the UK and is also GDPR-compliant. The facial recognition and behavioural analytics platform has been running successfully in many countries for several years, including in Nairobi, Mombasa and several other locations in Africa. It’s also the world’s most accurate facial recognition platform in independent tests conducted by the National Institute of Standards (NIST) in the US,” he added. NEC XON, the pan-African systems integrator (SI), the African affiliate of NEC Corporation in Japan, has a close partnership with NEC, the Japanese electronics company that created NeoFace Watch. NEC XON is the combination of XON, a Systems Integrator providing custom ICT and security services and solutions in Southern Africa since 1996, and NEC Africa, the African business of the global technology giant NEC Corporation. NEC Corporation implemented its first communication solution in Africa in 1963 and established NEC Africa in 2011 to grow its business ICT and public safety. Kapela Capital (Pty) Ltd, XON’s B-BBEE partner since 2010, continues as NEC XON’s B-BBEE partner in South Africa, with Israel Skosana as chairman of the board of directors of NEC XON. NEC generates global revenues in excess of $30 billion by orchestrating a brighter world for public entities, enterprises, telecoms carriers, and providing system platforms for businesses. The combined NEC Africa and XON (NEC XON) operations seek to more fully explore the opportunities for safe city, energy, cyber security, telecommunication solutions, retail, managed services, cyber defence services and cloud (both public and private), among others in sub-Sahara Africa. NEC XON maintains its head offices in Gauteng, South Africa with a footprint that covers all nine provinces in South Africa and 16 countries in sub-Sahara Africa. Click here for more information from NEC XON This article was published in partnership with NEC XON.