Small and mid-sized businesses are switching to virtual servers in large numbers. This is because virtual servers reduce costs and provide better business continuity. To help businesses understand the different types of server solutions that are available, Network Platforms has published a whitepaper which provides a simple guide on the subject. Click here to download the Network Platforms whitepaper This includes in-depth information on virtual servers, onsite servers, and cloud server providers. The first step is understanding the different types of servers. A physical server is a single machine that is usually situated on a business’s premises. It is normally managed by the business’s IT professionals, which means you need to employ staff who can manage the server. This can drive up costs, but provides full control of your server – allowing your team to tailor the system specifically to your needs. Many businesses are now moving to cloud servers, however, where they are provided server space in a datacentre operated by a third-party provider. Because the physical server hardware is run by this provider, it means that a business does not need to employ staff to manage it. You will also save space in your office and will be able to scale your solution up or down as you need it – which provides further cost benefits. Virtual servers, which are usually provided by cloud server providers, use software such as VMware to create several virtual server instances on a single physical server machine. Each of these virtual servers has its own operating system and software – meaning that for all intents and purposes, it operates just as a physical, dedicated server does. The benefits of virtualisation are numerous, and through virtualisation it becomes easier for cloud providers to offer customers superior value compared to running their own dedicated server solutions. One of the most notable benefits of virtual servers is that if a business needs more resources, they will not need to acquire more hardware to support this – as they would with an onsite server. Instead, a cloud server provider can simply allocate the business’s virtual server more resources. The inverse is true, too – if a business does not need as many resources as they are currently allocated, the cloud server provider can scale their resources down and save them money. The Networks Platforms whitepaper expands upon the above with extensive information that is written in a clear and simple manner. Valuable information that is available in the whitepaper includes: How to know if you need a dedicated server.
Using onsite or hosted cloud servers.
Benefits of hosted cloud servers.
Benefits of onsite servers.
How cloud service providers work.
What to consider when selecting a cloud service provider.
How virtual servers are priced. Get this whitepaper for free by clicking here. Network Platforms has been connecting business since 2003, and provides a host of remote and on-site technologies designed to create effective ICT business environments. Network Platforms’ services are tailored to help businesses grow through increased productivity, profitability and peace of mind. Our robust network core is housed in one of SA’s foremost Datacentres. We have three VMware environments; two in South Africa and one in London. This article was published in partnership with Network Platforms.