Stories inspire us. They teach us, they entertain us, and they comfort us. From the beginning of time children have sat on their parents’ laps and listened to tales of wonder. It is in stories where we first encounter the evil in the world, where we learn that actions have consequences, and that endings can be happy and sad. And sometimes it is hard to tell which. Click here to register for the Born in Adversity II online webinar As we grow, the stories that we relate to change according to our interest. A young boy might become intrigued by famous battles and a young girl by magicians and magic, but whether we realize it or not, they will continue to accompany us on our journey through life. Business is no different. We are drawn to “rags to riches” accounts of success. We are intrigued by those who might have struggled, but who became unimaginably successful and we can’t but listen to the warning signs of those who have traveled the road that we might be on, but who have taken the wrong turn. We engage through the experience of others and we gain insight into our own lives through theirs. It’s how we have always learned. Some weeks ago, Synthesis launched a series called Born in Adversity where it showcased the inspiring life of Vusi Thembekwayo and others. He captivated the attendees who were entranced by his journey. The feedback was tremendous, which is why Born in Adversity II was conceived. Featuring businesswoman Amanda Dambuza, business media personality Nastassia Arendse, and Synthesis cofounder Jake Shepherd, the free one hour webinar – through stories and contemplation – will take a look at the many faces of a successful business. What does a successful business look like to you? Join us Thursday, 27 August for a unique and perspective altering experience. Once upon a time, in land far away, is how it begins. How will your story end? Click here to register for the Born in Adversity II online webinar This article was published in partnership with Synthesis.