Health minister Dr Zweli Mkhize says that South Africa is moving away from its coronavirus peak and that the country’s recovery rate is continuing to increase. Mkhize said on Wednesday (19 August) said that the country has now passed the ‘inflection point’ and was now showing a downward trend. “Whereas the numbers are approaching 600,000 cases, we do know that there will be more people than that who are positive in the country,” he said. He said that the country has now passed 12,000 deaths which, while a very high number in terms of loss of life, “there are diseases that cause worse challenges than that,” he said. The minister also noted that South Africa’s death rate was lower than other countries, which was a positive way to look at things. The country also boasts a recovery rate of over 82%, with some provinces reporting over 90% recoveries. “On that point, it is the right time for us to start considering the steps that must be done as we move through the risk-adjusted approach towards normality,” he said. <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> As of Wednesday, a cumulative total of 596,060 confirmed Covid-19 cases in South Africa have been recorded with 3,916 new cases identified in the previous 24 hours. The total number of tests conducted to date is 3,455,671 with 25,324 new tests conducted since the last report An additional 159 deaths were reported i the previous 24 hours, bringing the total Covid-19 related cumulative deaths to 12,423.  South Africa moved to a level 2 lockdown at 00h01 on Tuesday (18 August). As part of the move, President Cyril Ramaphosa said that a number of restrictions would be eased, including: All restrictions on inter-provincial travel will be lifted; Accommodation facilities will be permitted, in line with approved protocols; Restaurants, bars and taverns will be permitted to operate subject to regulations; Restrictions on the sale of tobacco will be lifted; Prohibition on the sale of alcohol will be lifted subject to restrictions. On-site consumption will be permitted until 22h00; Liquor outlets can sell liquor from Monday to Thursday, between 09h00 and 17h00; Gyms and fitness centres can open, with approved protocols in place; The curfew will remain in place from 22h00 – 04h00; Gatherings of more than 50 people are still prohibited, as are sports events with spectators; International travel is still prohibited outside of the existing regulations. Read: South Africa probes dubious virus contracts worth R5 billion