Rain was the first company to launch a 5G network in South Africa. This network is powered by Huawei’s 5G equipment and ensures that South Africans can get the full benefits of 5G. Click here to get Rain 5G and a free-to-use Huawei 5G CPE Pro Beyond its network equipment, Huawei is also the supplier of the 5G CPE routers that Rain customers use in their homes and for their businesses. Huawei’s proprietary Balong 5000 chipset powers its impressive Huawei 5G CPE Pro, and at launch was the world’s first 5G multimode modem chipset – allowing customers to switch between 4G and 5G with ease. It successfully passes industry benchmarks with ease by offering peak 2.3Gbps download speeds, and offers users dedicated video channel and game accelerator channel technologies – allowing them to access smooth and reliable 8K video streaming and VR gaming. The Huawei 5G CPE Pro further offers dual-band 2.4GHz and 5GHz connectivity. 5GHz connectivity ensures that devices which are in close range to the CPE get top speeds, while the 2.4GHz band ensures that devices further away from the CPE get great speeds and stability. Huawei HiLink makes setting up and using the 5G router a breeze. This technology allows users to connect to their network with a single click, removing the need for entering a password to get a Wi-Fi connection. HiLink also makes it easier to build a mesh network in your home or office. Using the Huawei 5G CPE Pro and other HiLink-compatible Huawei access points, it is easy to provide Wi-Fi coverage over a large area – such as your home or a multi-room office building. This is because HiLink-powered routers and access points are designed to enable users’ devices to switch between them based on their proximity. Rain’s 5G network offers high-speed, affordable 5G connectivity to South Africans in both Johannesburg and Cape Town. Rain also has plans to expand to other metros in the next 18 months. Those interested in signing up to a Rain 5G package can choose between: Unlimited Home 5G Standard – R699pm
Unlimited Home 5G Premium – R999pm Click here to learn more about this great deal. This article was published in partnership with Huawei.