Many businesses in South Africa have been forced to transition to remote working because of the national lockdown. However, this is a far more complicated undertaking than it may first appear – particularly for SME’s (Small and Medium Enterprises). Click here to contact Turrito about IT solutions for your business. That’s because businesses previously operating from of a single office have now effectively become “multi-branch” businesses, with the majority of their staff working from individual home “branch offices”. Thankfully, according to Turrito CEO Brian Timperley, the right technologies can empower these businesses to solve challenges created by remote working. Timperley said there are major security challenges posed by remote working that businesses need to consider. “The vulnerability of your employee’s PC is just one of the many security risks of remote working,” said Timperley. “In most cases the cyber security hardware and tools deployed in a company’s primary office are all bypassed when users access the internet from their homes, which leaves both the user and the business vulnerable.” With the right tools, a business also has the ability to monitor its own data and see when it is being accessed, who is accessing it, and what the users have done to the data. It is important that businesses have this level of insight and control, which can quickly and easily be enabled with the right tools. “For example, a business can limit access to company files, even files that are downloaded can be set to self-encrypt after a set period of time,” Timperley explained. Timperley also highlighted the importance of having adequate compliance measures in place. This includes ensuring that your data is not stored on unsecured devices, or onsite servers without automated backups – which contravene regulations like POPI and GDPR. Instead, there are incredible cloud solutions available which ensure you always have full knowledge of where your data is stored, various means of recalling your data and controlling who can access it. Turrito is a leading ICT solutions provider that aggregates the best IT and Telecommunication products for Mid-market businesses in SA. Its success lies in the fact that it does not invest in infrastructure, but instead partners with the best players in the market to aggregate all the available solutions from a single provider. This makes Turrito far more agile and solution-agnostic than its competitors. Timperley said the COVID-19 pandemic has further reinforced the fact that Turrito’s business model continues to gain more and more relevance in an ever changing market. “Our approach pre-COVID has always enabled working remotely,” said Timperley. “Many providers who invested heavily in certain infrastructure pre-Covid are in a very difficult position now. Instead, we’re agile enough to pivot our customers to the most suitable technologies in the very new post-Covid world.” “Our customers were able to quickly continue operations remotely – their technology situation was barely impacted. And when something had to change, we were able to effect the change quickly to ensure maximum productivity for our clients.” Click here to contact Turrito about IT solutions for your business. This article was published in partnership with Turrito.