From humble beginnings to becoming the largest web design company in only 6 years, Web Partner stands to tell a tale not many web design companies in South Africa can. When asked what the secret to their success is, CEO and Founder, Brian le Roux said, “Our success comes from putting our customers first. You can offer a great product, but if your customer service doesn’t exceed your client’s expectations, you won’t survive.” Click here to find out how Web Partner can help your business thrive With many big and small agencies and freelancers competing in the industry, web design has become a highly saturated market in South Africa. But affordable, cost-effective packages and exceptional service earned Web Partner a solid reputation as the only web design company in the country to assist more than 10,000+ small businesses with their website design needs. And while their core business is web design, this growing agency has offered customers an excellent return on investment with Google advertising, SEO, and social media marketing. “Our service doesn’t begin and end with website design, we’ve been fortunate enough to grow into a full service agency with a staff complement of 30+ who can also assist small businesses with marketing and support where needed,” le Roux said. From as little as R299 a month, with no setup fees, hidden costs, or contracts, Web Partner makes the process of getting your business online effortless. Their packages tailored to suit both budget and needs include: Domain registration
Email setup
Hosting
A dedicated designer will be assigned to your project
1-hour free monthly maintenance “We are confident in the quality of our designs, and our 5-star rating on Google and social media is an indication of the quality of service we offer. But I believe it’s our responsibility to prioritise educating our clients. We want to help businesses grow to their full potential and get the best return on their investment. The more our clients grow and succeed, the more Web Partner will grow and succeed,” said le Roux. He added, “I’m proud of our success, it didn’t happen overnight. There was a lot of trial and error, and there’ll always be room for growth and new things we’ll keep learning as we go along. Our clients are always our number one priority, they put their faith and trust in us. And we promise to keep putting our best foot forward, whether it’s in design, marketing, getting more skilled staff, or upskilling.” It’s obvious technology is constantly evolving and will continue to do so. And more businesses are realising that a website and digital marketing will help their business grow and succeed in this digital era. With an excellent and reputable track record and value for money packages, Web Partner’s offering as a web design company in South Africa is unmatched, thus making them the perfect Web Partner to help get your business the best results. Click here to find out how Web Partner can help your business thrive This article was published in partnership with Web Partner.