Planet Fitness says it has received the ‘green light’ from government and that it now plans to reopen its clubs on 1 September 2020. As part of the country’s move to level 2 lockdown, fitness centres and gyms are allowed to open subject to a limitation of 50 persons or less. In a notice sent to clients, Planet Fitness said that it has introduced a number of health and safety features in preparation for reopening. These changes are outlined in more detail below. Pre-access station On arrival at the Club, members will need to present themselves at a pre-access station first, there you will be screened by our Nurse or Covid-19 Compliance officer. “At the pre-access station you will need to give us your details, have your temperature taken and we will make sure that you are wearing a mask, and ensure that you are not displaying any Covid-19 symptoms and are well enough to train,” Planet Fitness said. “Once you have the green light to enter, you will proceed to tag yourself in at the Reception desk and enjoy all our facilities safely.” Cleaning and safety Planet Fitness said all key surfaces are disinfected after every use and that it will completely disinfect its gym every night. The group said that it will also do an extra deep clean of the entire gym once a week. “Planet Fitness staff are regularly tested for Covid-19 and temperatures are tested every day during shift change,” it said. “We have staff on hand to disinfect after use and we have several new sanitising stations throughout the club for you to use, whenever you like. “You will notice that we’ve added a bottle of sanitiser to every piece of equipment together with paper towel freely available throughout the club, at convenient locations, that will allow you to sanitise the equipment yourself, before you use it.” Face masks Planet Fitness said that the use of face masks in all of its clubs will be mandatory. The group has asked members to wear a face mask at all times, on arrival and throughout your workout. Social distancing The group said that it has placed markings throughout the club, on the floor and on equipment which will help members to stick to our social distancing requirements. “Some equipment has been disabled or moved out of the club to assist with social distancing,” it said. “We encourage you to make use of our self-service check-in on arrival, at the Club, once you have passed through the pre-access screening station.” The group also asked members to keep contact to a minimum and social distancing to a maximum. “You will also notice that we have disabled some of the lockers and other areas in our change rooms to ensure that you have the required amount of space around you. Unfortunately, for now, showers will also be closed.” Read: South Africa’s biggest gyms won’t reopen on Tuesday