Government has published a series of new directives which update the country’s level 3 lockdown regulations. The first directive, published by Tourism minister Mmamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane, confirms a number of announcements she made last week around the opening of the tourism sector. The most notable changes revolve around guided tours and provincial travel. These are outlined in more detail below. Travel In line with Kubayi-Ngubane’s announcement last week, individuals will be allowed to leave their homes for leisure purposes – but only within their province. Accommodation facilities will be allowed to open for leisure purposes. However, no more than two people may share a room, with the exceptions of a ‘nuclear family’. While there was initially confusion around what a ‘nuclear family’ includes, the directive now explicitly states that this includes family members or caregivers living in the same household. Guided tours The directive also confirms that guided tours are permitted as part of the opening up of the tourism industry. The regulations state that a person conducting a tour must keep a record of the full names, identity number or passport number and cellphone numbers of the people taking part in the guided tour. The person giving the guided tour must also: Not allow a person to the tour if that person is not wearing a cloth mask, or homemade item that covers the nose and mouth or another appropriate item to cover the nose and mouth; Ensure that every person involved in the tour wears a mask at all times except when eating or drinking; Sanitise persons involved in the tour before they enter a tour vehicle, rail or boat; Ensure that during guided activities that require walking, a social distance of one and a half metres is maintained at all times among persons involved in the tour; Ensure that the loading capacity of guided tour vehicles and other modes of public transport complies with the directions issued by the minister of transport. Sports and culture The second directive, published by Sports, Arts and Culture minister Nathi Mthethwa, confirms a number of announcements around the reopening of sporting and cultural activities. Specifically, the directive provides for: Professional non-contact sport to resume training and matches;
Professional contact sport to resume training and matches subject to the submission of the information required;
Spectators are still prohibited from attending matches;
Participation in international sports event outside of the country’s borders is still prohibited. The directive also provides further restrictions around training and matches. This includes the time-slots when training may occur, what type of training may take place, disinfection protocols, and the officials, staff and team members who may participate. Read: Government to discuss updated lockdown recommendations for South Africa: report