While some South Africans are counting down the hours until government lifts the ban on the sale of liquor and cigarettes from midnight on Monday (17 August), retailer Game says it will limit how much alcohol each customer can buy. “No more than 2 cases of beer or cider and one box of wine (2L – 5L), or 1 case of beer or cider and 2 boxes of wine (2L – 5L) are allowed per customer,” Game said in a statement on Monday. “Additionally, a maximum of 6 bottles of spirits or wine (750ml – 1L) are allowed per customer.” Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma has published the official alert level 2 lockdown regulations for South Africa. The sale of liquor by licensed premises for off-consumption, is permitted from 09h00 to 17h00, from Mondays to Thursdays. A licensed premises may also sell for on-site consumption, subject to strict adherence to the curfew. All customers are required to wear masks at all times and remain 2 metres apart from each other, the retailer said. “Where customers are in groups or couples, only one customer will be allowed in at a time from that group or couple. Customers are also encouraged to only touch the products they intend to buy and to pay by card or mobile app where possible,” Game said. Similar retailers, including Makro, Spar (Tops) and Pick n Pay have not placed any limits on unit sales. Tops at Spar said its stores will be open from Tuesday (18 August) at 09h00.”As we move into Level 2 of lockdown and reopen our stores in line with government regulations, we ask that you please adhere to our safe shopping protocols,” the group said. It asked customers to: Wear a mask;
Sanitise and;
Keep a safe distance. “We also ask that you please practise safe and responsible consumption at home,” it said.  Makro warned that it may close the doors to its stores earlier than stipulated to allow for final orders to be processed. It added that customers can buy groceries and liquor through OneCart and get same-day delivery. Read: Here are the official level 2 lockdown rules for South Africa – including the new limits on social visits