To remain relevant and be able to compete in the digital age, it’s imperative for every business to embark on a digital transformation journey. This includes migrating existing legacy systems to the cloud before they reach their end of life. This will help to improve these businesses’ overall system performance. The migration of an existing SAP Business Suite to the cloud-based SAP S/4HANA platform – SAP’s fourth ERP business suite – allows you to benefit from next-generation operations on a proven technology platform that will underpin your business growth. Stand a chance of winning R3,000 by participating in this short survey That said, an organisation’s migration journey to S/4HANA needs to be underpinned by a well-defined strategy that is aligned with the business needs of the enterprise, and also sets out the deployment option and approach that best suits the business. This can be a daunting task with many frustrating decisions, each of which requires intensive assessment and a careful evaluation of the benefits that an organisation can leverage from the SAP S/4HANA platform. Consequently, many businesses are choosing managed and professional services from certified SAP partners for their S/4HANA migrations rather than attempting the implementation on their own. HPE SA and BCX are both certified S/4HANA implementation partners and can play a crucial role in helping organisations become more innovative and agile than their competitors. As an SAP Service Alliance Partner, BCX offers the very best in ICT systems and services based on the unique needs and operational requirements of any business. The company provides a full range of SAP services and is supported through SAP’s Partner Programme. According to Derek Fox, SAP Principal Consultant at BCX, the BCX SAP Centre of Excellence has excellent capabilities and a skilled staff complement which is why it is recognised as a leader in providing end-to-end SAP services in Southern Africa. “As an SAP outsourcing operations and gold partner, as well as a value-added reseller (VAR), we are certified to build, sell, service, and implement SAP solutions to all industries. BCX is an SAP Service Alliance partner, certified hosting partner, certified cloud services partner, certified partner of the Centre of Excellence for SAP Software Support, and certified HANA operations services partner,” said Fox. One of the services that BCX offers is migration to SAP S/4HANA solutions, including implementation, while the implementation of AppDynamics for SAP speeds up cloud migration and S/4HANA adoption. Concurrently, HPE SA is the market leader for S/4HANA solutions, which allows customers to capitalise on its expertise and infrastructure portfolio to gain advantages with SAP S/4HANA. HPE SA understands the migration journey to SAP S/4HANA, and as a leading vendor and a large SAP S/4HANA customer, HPE has unique insights to help ensure its customers’ success. Riaz Patel, Value Sales Specialist at HPE SA, explained that HPE SA accompanies enterprises from the profitability analysis phase through the conception and to the implementation phases and last adjustments for a successful S/4HANA transformation. HPE SA takes a customer’s entire SAP system landscape into consideration in order to advise a long-term favourable transformation strategy. It offers SAP S/4HANA both as an on-premise and cloud solution. Patel said partnering with BCX creates a significant advantage for the company, as the SAP skills and expertise that BCX brings become an extension of the S/4HANA implementations that HPE SA can deliver. “We have faith in BCX to deliver the services, consulting and implementation aspects of a project, and likewise they have the confidence in us to deliver the actual hardware, with the choice of configuration that the customer wants,” he said. For more information, visit the BCX website. This article was published in partnership with HPE BCX.