Ster-Kinekor says it will start reopening its cinemas across the country from 28 August. The group said that that the reopening will be done in a phased approach to ensure that operationally employees have been trained on the new Covid-19 health and safety measures and all the PPE required is ready when trading. The first phase will see 32 cinemas open, followed by the remaining 21 sites on 18 September. “We’ve been getting ready to welcome patrons back to the cinema since Government’s announcement on the 6 July. We have taken every step to ensure the safe return of our guests and staff to the cinema with our staff having undergone extensive Covid-19 operations training,” said Ster Kinekor deputy chief executive, Motheo Matsau. All Ster-Kinekor cinemas will operate with new safety procedures that ensure compliance with directives set out by government, he said. Each theatre will be permitted a maximum of 50 guests per auditorium, excluding staff. Other measures which will be introduced include: Regulated seating;
Marked foyer floors to manage social distancing;
Longer show staggers to manage the number of people in our foyers at any one time. “We will ensure stringent hygiene protocols are in place for the safety of our guests and staff,” Ster Kinekor said. “To limit contact, no transactions will take place in cinema and all movie tickets and snacks must be purchased through the Ster-Kinekor App or on our website. “After the show guests will be required to exit the auditorium row-by-row starting from the back of the cinema and are requested to remove their empty snack containers to discard in the dustbins which will be placed in the cinema foyers.” Before opening doors, it will use a misting device to treat all cinemas, as well as in its lounge areas, foyers, hand railings and seats. The group said it will continue to sanitise the cinemas before and after each show and have increased our cleaning times between every show to make sure all seats and surfaces are clean and safe. “Masks and temperature screening will be compulsory when entering the cinema foyer however masks may be temporarily removed in the auditorium to enjoy the refreshments. “All our staff will be screened before we open the cinemas each day, as well as at each shift. We will wear face masks and gloves where required and our staff have been trained on safe work practices to ensure safety for themselves and for our guests.” Read: Showmax Pro and Shomax Pro Mobile prices for South Africa