President Cyril Ramaphosa has reportedly survived an attack on his leadership after a senior ANC official called for his resignation ahead of the ruling party’s national executive committee (NEC) meeting. The Sunday Times reported that ANC NEC member Tony Yengeni was one of the most senior officials to call for the president’s resignation, saying that he lacked the ‘moral compass’ to lead the fight against corruption. “What Tony was saying is that the issue of stepping aside should start with you as the president … You are in court,” said an executive, who asked not to be named. Ramaphosa was also of bringing the ANC into disrepute by describing the party as ‘accused number one’. “Once you say that, you are putting the ANC into disaster. That is the narrative of the DA and other opposition parties. As ANC president, you can’t align yourself with that,” the executive said. “So, you must lead by example and step aside. Emulate Zuma, who stepped aside when he was accused in 2005, before the national general council brought him back.” Despite the calls to step down, Ramaphosa remained steadfast in tackling corruption and said he will present himself before the party’s integrity commission to answer questions relating to the funding of his 2017 campaign to become party president. Letter to the ANC Ramaphosa faces increased scrutiny after he sent an open letter to ANC members last weekend, criticising corruption within the party. He said that the ANC needs to face the reality that its leaders stand accused of corruption – and that the party itself is “accused number one”. He said that the corruption involved private sector companies and individuals, but is also deeply rooted within the party and the government. “As the inheritors of the legacy of Luthuli, Tambo and Mandela, we must be honest with ourselves. We must acknowledge that our movement, (the ANC), has been and remains deeply implicated in South Africa’s corruption problem. “We have to be sensitive to the concerns that are being raised by our people about our role as a movement in corrupt activities,” the president said. “Today, the ANC and its leaders stand accused of corruption. The ANC may not stand alone in the dock, but it does stand as accused number one. This is the start reality that we must now confront,” he said. Ramaphosa said that he isn’t suggesting that corruption is only a problem within the ANC – or that corruption is widespread among members – but the party has been ineffective in dealing with corruption, and in some cases allowed it to flourish. Possible cabinet reshuffle As the political manoeuvring is set to continue this weekend, Bloomberg reported that Ramaphosa is considering making changes to his cabinet, citing people familiar with the deliberations. The meeting could be a showdown between the president and his rivals within the ANC, the people said, asking not to be identified as a public statement hasn’t been made. Ramaphosa is looking for ways to revive South Africa’s stagnant economy and help boost investor confidence in his administration. Read: The ‘silver lining’ of South Africa’s Covid-19 corruption: Ramaphosa