Every business owner knows that stable, high-speed broadband gives them an edge over their competitors – and in the wake of the pandemic, the need to keep connected is even more important than ever before. The growing appetite for connectivity has seen a number of new ISPs enter the market and try to outpace the slower, traditional telcos by creating new connectivity pathways. However, the feeding frenzy for fast connections means that it’s increasingly difficult to build a network that leverages existing global infrastructure effectively. This is because everyone is jostling for position on the same system of undersea cables and peering exchanges. Despite this competition to create free-flowing networks, Network Platforms wholesale connectivity and IP transit solutions are already the driving force between 25 of South Africa’s biggest ISPs, because they offer unparalleled performance and stability. And if you sign up right now, they;’ll protect your new network for 6-months at no additional costs Click here to sign up to IP transit from Network Platforms. As a leader in IP transit in South Africa, Network Platforms offers a wholesale Internet service that is perfect for ISPs looking to offer their customers more options and faster connectivity. It is one of the most popular IP transit services in the country for a variety of reasons, including: Network performance and reliability – Network Platforms IP transit uses a number of cable networks and international points-of-presence (POP).
Competitive pricing – Network Platforms offers optimal pricing structures.
Flexibility – IP transit from Network Platforms includes a variety of services and solutions to choose from.
Fantastic after-sales support – Network Platforms prides itself on its highly-qualified and helpful support technicians. One of the most notable advantages provided by IP transit through Network Platforms is the extensive range of choices available to ISPs and businesses. Direct capacity is available on numerous international subsea cables – including WACS, SAT-3, EASSy, Seacom, and SAFE. Network Platforms also connects to four of the biggest IP transit providers: Telia, PCCW Global, CenturyLink, and Cogent. Telia is delivered in Telehouse House East, while Cogent and CenturyLink are delivered in Harbour Exchange via Layer2 services from Cape Town, and Johannesburg to London. PCCW Global is Network Platforms’ newest Tier 1 provider and offers connectivity between Africa and the East via the SAFE cable network. With so many providers and subsea cables comprising its IP transit product, Network Platforms ensures you have extensive redundancies in place. Network Platforms also offers peering at the London Internet Exchange (LINX) and Amsterdam’s AMS-IX and DEC-IX peering exchanges. Network Platforms is trusted by over 20 local Internet service providers, who access its leading combination of IP transit and local and international Layer 2 services. To see the low latencies available through IP transit from Network Platforms, click here and access the Network Platforms IP transit looking glass. If you sign up to IP transit from Network Platforms by end October 2020, you will also receive the following benefits: 6 months free protected National Long Distance between Teraco Johannesburg and Teraco Cape Town, or Johannesburg and Durban, for all new customers.
6 months free DDOS mitigation and scrubbing. Click here to sign up today. This article was published in partnership with Network Platforms.