President Cyril Ramaphosa has addressed the nation regarding the Covid-19 coronavirus outbreak in South Africa, and listed restrictions to curb the spread of the virus. “As of now, South Africa has 61 confirmed cases of people infected with the virus, and this number is expected to rise in the coming days and weeks,” he said. “This situation calls for an extraordinary response; there can be no half-measures,” said Ramaphosa, adding that a national state of disaster has been implemented in the country. “Cabinet held a special meeting earlier today. We have decided to take urgent and drastic measures to manage the disease, protect the people of our country and reduce the impact of the virus on our society and on our economy. “We have now declared a national state of disaster in terms of the Disaster Management Act.” Any person who has visited high-risk countries in the past 20 days will be denied a visa, the president said. “South African citizens returning from high-risk countries will be subjected to testing and self-isolation or quarantine on return to South Africa.” Following an extensive analysis of the progression of the disease worldwide and in South Africa, Cabinet has decided on the following measures: Travellers from medium-risk countries – such as Portugal, Hong Kong and Singapore – will be required to undergo high intensity screening.
All travellers who have entered South Africa from high-risk countries since mid-February will be required to present themselves for testing.
Surveillance, screening and testing measures at OR Tambo, Cape Town and King Shaka International Airports will be strengthened.
South Africa has 72 ports of entry in the country which are land, sea and air ports. Of the 53 land ports, 35 will be shut down with effect from Monday 16 March. Two of the eight sea ports will be closed for passengers and crew changes.
Effective immediately, all non-essential travel for all spheres of government outside of the Republic is prohibited. All non-essential domestic travel, particularly by air, rail, taxis and bus are discouraged.
Gatherings of more than 100 people will be prohibited.
Where small gatherings are unavoidable, organisers will need to put in place stringent measures of prevention and control.
Schools will be closed from Wednesday, 18 March, and will remain closed until after the Easter weekend. To compensate, the mid-year school holidays will be shortened by a week. “Government is working with colleges, universities & other public facilities such as Parliament, prisons, police stations & military installations to intensify hygiene control,” Ramaphosa said. “Visits to all correctional centres are suspended for 30 days with immediate effect.” Rising cases in South Africa Earlier on Sunday, health minister Zweli Mkhize announced that the number of Covid-19 infections in South Africa had risen to 51. The number rose by 13 from Saturday’s figure of 38. Ramaphosa said that this number is now at 61. In his statement, the Health Ministry said Mkhize and deputy health minister Joe Phaahla held an urgent meeting with all provincial MECs and heads of department for health on Saturday night. The purpose of the meeting was to discuss the latest situational analysis of each province as more cases of Covid-19 cases are being confirmed. Mkhize said: “In our engagement, it became clear that the role played by contact tracers is very important and their capacity needs to be strengthened. “The NHC agreed that in order to minimise the risk of further spread of the virus, contact tracing must be done within 48 hours.” The National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) said while the country continues to see an increase in Covid-19 positive cases in South Africa, there is currently no evidence to suggest that Covid-19 is circulating in South Africa’s population. “However, the status of Covid-19 transmission is increasingly likely to shift based on trends found in other parts of the world. We call on all South Africans to continue to follow Covid-19 preventive measures such as meticulous hand hygiene and cough etiquette,” said the institute. The NICD, a division of the National Health Laboratory Service, has tested 1476 for SARS-CoV-2 ­– the causative pathogen for Covid-19. The NICD said it has decided that doctors no longer need to contact the NICD for approval for testing as long as they apply the case definition before testing. Practice good hygiene Ramaphosa said that the state is partnering with the private sector to set up a national tracking, tracing and monitoring system of all people infected with the coronavirus and those they have been in contact with. “Wash hands frequently with soap & water for 29 seconds or use hand sanitisers; cover their nose and mouth when coughing and sneezing with tissue or flexed elbow; avoid close contact with anyone with cold or flu-like symptoms. “In essence, we are calling for a change of behavior amongst all South Africans. We must minimise physical contact with other people, and, encourage the elbow greeting rather than shaking hands,” the president said. Read: Coronavirus in South Africa jumps to 51 cases 