Specialist professional recruitment firm Robert Walters has published its annual salary survey, showing that professional salaries across South Africa increased by an average of 9% in 2019 – with professionals in finance and accounting expecting their pay to increase by over 10% in 2020. “2019 was characterised by hiring caution heading into the general election, a sluggish economy and high unemployment of 29%, which created an increasingly competitive market for job seekers,” it said. “Recruitment processes became drawn out and protracted resulting in organisations losing out on good talent. Companies sought internationally minded professionals with high adaptability and strong business acumen to minimise the downtime often experienced during onboarding. “The demand for employment equity candidates continued to influence hiring processes and these professionals saw salary increases of between 10-15% – slightly down compared to movers in 2018,” it said. Other categories demanding premium salaries included transactional lawyers and specialists who could demonstrate high levels of technical financial competence, industry knowledge and expertise in data, AI and BI. Interestingly salary increases across all new job starters were considerably higher than professionals moving internally, which highlighted the market churn trends, the group said. In 2020, the shift in focus will be from staff retention to the productivity and effectiveness of employees, said Nic Sephton-Poultney, managing director of Robert Walters South Africa. “Historically, specialist skill sets were considered a ‘value-add’, but we expect this to be a minimum requirement for candidates moving forward,” he said. In the financial services sector, the jobs that are in most demand are for financial reporting accountants, financial managers, analysts, corporate finance specialists and internal auditors. Professionals in this sector are very open to moving jobs with the right offer, particularly if it provides them with an opportunity for career progression and a higher salary, the group said. Between 70% and 80% of professionals have indicated a sense of confidence for job opportunities in the sector – depending on the specific industry. The tables below show how salaries for these professionals are expected to increase in 2020. Note: All figures exclude bonuses. Regional variations apply – for Cape Town or Durban, adjust by 10% to 20% lower. Accounting and Finance Banking and Financial Services Read: South African salaries in 2020: what professionals earn 