Pick n Pay has announced that it will remain open during South Africa’s coronavirus lockdown, with customers able to shop in-store and online for groceries and essentials. The group said it will be adjusting its trading hours to ensure staff can get to and from their homes during the permitted travel hours.  Store trading hours will depend on local legislation, and the online shop will be open 24/7. You can find a list of store hours here. Pick n Pay said that its Hypermarkets will remain open with the following trading hours: Monday-Friday: 09h00 – 18h00
Saturday: 08h00 – 17h00
Sunday: 09h00 – 16h00 “You will be able to buy all your usual groceries and essentials in-store and online,” Pick n Pay said.  “Purchase limits have been implemented on certain essential items to ensure that all customers can get what they need. “Our online shop maintains strict hygiene and has also implemented no-contact deliveries during this time. Please remember to shop in advance, as due to increased demand, delivery slots are filling up fast.” The group said that customers will be able to buy: All Fresh, perishable, edible and non-edible grocery items;
Health and beauty products;
Essential general merchandise categories;
Seeds & bulbs;
Pool chemicals;
Batteries & lightbulbs;
Home cleaning products;
Newspapers (excluding magazines;
School and home office stationery supplies;
Charcoal, firewood, firelighters and paraffin, and methylated spirits. The group said thar customers will not be able to buy alcohol, cigarettes, clothing, or other general merchandise other than the categories mentioned above (e.g. TVS and appliances). It added that its Pick n Pay Liquor and Clothing stores will be closed, as well as those sections in-store and online. “You may find some items temporarily out of stock, but we have many essentials waiting to make their way to stores in our distribution centres, as well as a robust supply chain. “Food manufacturing and farming continues at this time, and we are confident that we can get you what you need.” Read: These major retailers will continue to deliver groceries during South Africa’s coronavirus lockdown 