A growing number of South Africans are looking to semigrate within the country, targetting better work opportunities and a change in lifestyle. Semigration refers to the action of moving from one part of a country to another. Real estate agency Seeff said that this is a common occurrence in South Africa, where people move from one province to another in search of something new or because of the unique opportunities available. Seeff said that reasons for moving may vary from the changing job market to property-related preferences, affordability, and general quality of life. For example, one family might move across the country due to better work opportunities in their profession, it said. Another example might be that there are greater growth opportunities in major cities rather than in a more rural, country community or small isolated town. Despite the different reasons for moving, Seeff said that certain areas are much more popular to relocate to. It outlined these areas below and explained why people are moving. Cape Town –  The most popular city for relocation from within the country is Cape Town and most semigrants come from Gauteng and from KwaZulu-Natal, Seeff said. “Cape Town is well known for its laid-back lifestyle, efficient municipalities, and world-class amenities – the Mother City’s popularity comes as no surprise. Northern KZN – The Northern parts of KZN are also in high demand for semigration, Seeff said. “It’s a less populated coastal region, so property here can get pricey. Luxury areas such as Zimbali Estate and the Dolphin Coast’s Ballito offer property owners a balance between seclusion and access to all the activities and amenities you can think of.” Plettenberg Bay, George and Knysna  – “Between the Eastern Cape and Western Cape lies a stretch of coastal areas known as the Garden Route,” Seeff said. “The towns of Plettenberg Bay and Knysna fall along this stretch and are also experiencing a wave of semigration. “Loaded with tourism opportunities, a lot of the property owners here have followed commercial interests, along with a property purchase that offers a quieter lifestyle.” Gauteng’s newly developed areas such as the West Rand, Gauteng East, the greater Fourways area and Midrand – Newly developed spots in the Gauteng region are a magnet to professionals and families alike, Seeff said. “These kinds of areas offer massive potential for business enthusiasts and families as the local economies in and around them are booming.” Read: A look inside South Africa’s new ‘tiny homes’ – and how much they cost 