The industrial sector requires wireless networks that can operate in continually changing environments where line of sight between infrastructure and mobile assets are not guaranteed. Inhibiting line of sight translates to poor signal quality, and signal quality directly impacts wireless throughput. Therefore, the Holy Grail is a wireless network that can continuously adapt with changing topography and therefore maintain good signal quality and high throughput. Click here to find out more from Duxbury Networking Communication requirements in the industrial sector are particularly unique in terms of demands placed upon wireless network infrastructure. Reliability, adaptability, mobility, bandwidth, scalability and redundancy are all critical requirements for markets such as mining, defence, oil and gas, utilities, transportation, municipal or government. Duxbury Networking is the distribution agent of Rajant’s Kinetic Mesh technology and offers two options for customers seeking to build or expand private wireless networks that are suited to industrial environments: Stand-alone wireless mesh networks: Users deploying a Rajant Kinetic Mesh network can configure and scale the network to virtually any desired environment or geography whilst still maintaining full control over network operations.
Integrate Kinetic Mesh with other networking technologies: Kinetic Mesh networks are fully compatible with other wired and wireless infrastructure such as LTE, Broadband Fixed Wireless, Wi-Fi, Fibre or VSAT. As a result, users can integrate Kinetic Mesh with any of these technologies to enhance mobile connectivity of industrial assets. “Machine-to-Machine (M2M) and Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) applications, prevalent in industrial enterprises, tend to focus heavily on upload capacity as opposed to LTE networks, for example, which was designed with download intensive consumer applications in mind. As a result, most LTE wireless network technologies are not suitable for typical industrial environments where multiple tandem applications requires more upload capacity,” said Teresa Huysamen, Business Unit executive for Rajant solutions at Duxbury Networking. Conversely, Kinetic Mesh connectivity is dynamic, with equal bandwidth available for downloads and uploads if or when required. This allows users to wirelessly connect their equipment or vehicles and efficiently communicate any information at any time. In M2M and V2V operations, the network can easily transfer random bursts of information without compromising dataflow. Along with their multi-frequency BreadCrumb wireless mesh nodes, Rajant’s patented InstaMesh networking software continuously determines the lowest latency route for data streams flowing across the wireless mesh. Also, in line with a policy of No Single Point of Failure (NSPOF) the mesh requires no central controller and networking intelligence is decentralised and distributed amongst BreadCrumb nodes. Since each wireless node can be connected to hundreds of neighbouring nodes, any node can transmit data, voice or video across the fastest and most efficient route available. In addition, because Kinetic Mesh supports multiple frequencies, data can be sent and received simultaneously on different frequencies. Huysamen points out that to have true adaptability and mobility within an industrial network, the network infrastructure must accommodate physical changes, including supporting mobile people and assets; adding, moving, or removing infrastructure nodes; and changing radio frequencies. “Rajant Kinetic Mesh networks thrive in changing environments. You can easily install Rajant BreadCrumb nodes on portable towers, industrial equipment, drones, and other assets for rapid and/or temporary connectivity. When terrain topology changes or you need to add equipment into the mesh, you can simply pick up lightweight BreadCrumb nodes, put them on portable trailers, and move them to the desired locations. “As you add, move, or remove nodes, InstaMesh instantly and automatically adapts to these changes. New links are established in real time while keeping the network available, intact, and secure with a make-before-break connection system. In fact, the more nodes you add, the more communication pathways you establish, and the more resilient your network becomes. “As a further benefit, any maintenance resource can be trained to deploy BreadCrumb nodes. Spectrum availability is also not an issue because Kinetic Mesh networks use unlicensed or light-licensed frequencies which are readily available worldwide,” Huysamen continued. BreadCrumb wireless nodes with InstaMesh are spectrally efficient, high-bandwidth nodes with physical-layer data rates of up to 300 Mbps. With multi-transceiver and multi-frequency BreadCrumb configurations, Kinetic Mesh networks can have multiple devices sending packets over multiple paths simultaneously. In addition, users can have multiple data off-load points throughout the mesh, allowing them to get information from the client device to the network infrastructure quickly. These capabilities translate into high bandwidth and high throughput, with fewer congestion related issues. “Kinetic Mesh networks are not controller based, which means that the networks have no single point of failure or the latency required to manage a controller. There is no difference in operation between a BreadCrumb infrastructure node and mobile node. So, you have any-node-to-any-node connectivity. If a BreadCrumb node becomes unavailable, InstaMesh simply redirects traffic around these out-of-service or damaged nodes and continues operating. In the event of catastrophic damage to the whole network, you could very quickly set up two or more nodes as a portable Kinetic Mesh network and re-establish communications,” Huysamen explained. Rajant’s Kinetic Mesh technology is specifically designed and engineered to address mobility requirements, including user mobility on the network as well as always-on communications to assets traversing these networks. As such, Kinetic Mesh networks can effectively handle many of the topographic, application, and data-transfer requirements inherent in industrial organisations. For more information contact Duxbury Networking, +27 (0) 11 351 9800, info@duxnet.co.za, www.duxbury.co.za.  This article was published in partnership with Duxbury Networking.