State-owned airline SAA says it will suspend all international and regional operations until May 2020, to help combat the spread of the coronavirus. “SAA will immediately suspend all regional and international operations until the end of May in response to a government travel ban aimed at stopping the transmission of the coronavirus (Covid-19),” it said. Only domestic flights between Cape Town and Johannesburg will operate. The suspension of flights follows the gazetting of Regulations and the issuing of a Notice to Air Men (NOTAM), an official government notice prohibiting the embarkation and disembarkation of crew and passengers from SAA’s three international destinations. The regulation is effective from Friday March 21, it said. “In support of efforts by government to in dealing with this pandemic, and in the best interests of our crew, passengers and the public, we have decided to suspend all international and regional flights until 31 May 2020. “It is a responsibility of all of us and not just government to curb further transmission of the virus. Especially because we operate in the high-risk regions,” said SAA Acting chief executive officer, Zuks Ramasia. In addition to the actions mentioned above, SAA will also suspend flights to its regional destinations, Accra (Ghana), Lusaka (Zambia), Harare (Zimbabwe), Victoria Falls (Zimbabwe), Mauritius, Windhoek (Namibia), Lagos (Nigeria), Entebbe (Uganda) and other countries which have not been declared high-risk such as Perth (Australia) and Sao Polo (Brazil). This is as a result of the significant reduction in demand for air travel as a result of various travel bans instituted worldwide, it said. “Notwithstanding the suspension of services in the international and regional markets, we are pleased to indicate that our domestic services are not impacted. This means, SAA will continue to operate between Johannesburg and Cape Town,” said Ramasia. The full statement is embedded below: Read: SAA cancels flights as coronavirus travel restrictions hit 