Pick n Pay has released a song calling on South Africans to not panic buy ahead of the coronavirus lockdown. President Cyril Ramaphosa has ordered a 21-day lockdown with severe restrictions on travel and movement – beginning midnight on Thursday – to combat the spread of the Covid-19 coronavirus in the country. The president’s address, on Monday evening, sparked some panic amid consumers, which ignited into panic buying in some areas. Pick n Pay called on consumers to resist the temptation to buy more than they need, and that there is no reason to stock up beyond their normal shopping. “There is enough food in the supply chain, and we ask customers to support us by not stocking up beyond what they need,” said John Bradshaw, retail executive: marketing at Pick n Pay. “Our stores will remain open, safe and well-stocked for our customers during this time so that they can continue to get what they want and need.” Pick n Pay has limited purchases on specific products per customer in store and online to help serve all customers. “Our staff are working really hard to keep our stores clean and our shelves stocked. We are giving them every support, and ask all our customers to do the same. We are all in this together,” said Bradshaw.  Government has asked South Africans not to panic buy and assured citizens that the country has more than enough food to survive the 21-day lockdown. “Exports and imports of critical agriculture commodities and the logistical measures will continue during this lockdown period to ensure global and national food security,” said Thoko Didiza, minister of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development. “This is not only limited to retailers but the entire food value chain, from farm-related operations, agro-processing and food manufacturing, logistics and related services, wholesale and retail services, and all support functions that ensure efficient delivery of the agro-food system. “As a nation, we boast for being self-sufficient in food production, and a part of this year’s supply is yet to be harvested – which promises to be a bumper field crop and citrus harvest – and these processes will continue as normal as a foundation of South Africa’s food system. “I will be making regular updates on crop estimates to inform the country of our critical commodity supply,” she said. Read: Why we need clear guidelines ahead of Covid-19 lockdown in South Africa: DA 