South African Airways (SAA) has launched a new sale, offering discounts of up to 20% to major destinations across its route network. The sale, which ends 5 March, will be accessible on all of the airline’s major distribution channels, at www.flysaa.com and throughout a network of travel agents both in South Africa and in other African and international markets it continues to serve. “In every business, there comes a time for change,” SAA said. “And at SAA we’re changing and that begins with our Change It Up Sale to give you better fares.” “Fly all-inclusive return to New York, Frankfurt, and London from R8,999, or Blantyre and Nairobi from R6,000.” The extended sale includes destinations such as: New York;
London;
Washington DC;
Perth;
Frankfurt;
Blantyre;
Dar es Salaam;
Kinshasa;
Harare;
Lilongwe;
Lagos;
Lusaka;
Livingstone;
Maputo;
Mauritius;
Nairobi;
Victoria Falls;
Windhoek. Prices are all-inclusive for return flights and are available in economy class, as well as for travel in business class. “We are pleased that our customers and travel trade partners are showing renewed trust in our brand. We aim to build further on this trust by offering our customers more exciting offers over the months ahead,” said Philip Saunders, SAA chief commercial officer. He added that SAA’s sales have also been bolstered by the reinstatement of the Travel Insurance Consultants insurance services across the travel trade, which provides protection for customers choosing to fly with the airline. Bailout SAA continues to be a drag on the economy, having lost more than R10 billion in the two financial years, ending 2019. In the 2020 Budget, National Treasury announced that it set aside R16.4 billion to repay guaranteed debt for the struggling airline. The group was placed under voluntary business rescue in December last year after the struggling state-owned entity was unable to meet financial obligations. “Since 2008/09, SAA has incurred net losses of over R32 billion. Government has set aside R16.4 billion for SAA [over the next three years] to repay the airline’s guaranteed debt and to cover debt-service costs. “The costs of this adjustment are still being finalised, and will be financed from existing provisional allocations for state-owned companies,” the National Treasury said. In February, SAA announced that it would stop flights to Durban and other major domestic routes as part of cost-cutting measures. As of 29 February the airline only offers flights between Johannesburg and Cape Town. A number of international flights were also cut including routes to Hong Kong and Munich. Read: SAA rescue plan deadline extended by a month 