South Africa has seen a significant rise in the number of car-buying services which offer consumers with a different approach to selling their vehicles. As sellers have become more circumspect when it comes to the prices car dealerships are willing to offer, they have started to turn to these car buying-services. These services provide customers with alternatives to the conventional sales or trade-in avenues by offering a convenient car sale process. Click here to visit the Bidvest McCarthy website and view their extensive range of new and used vehicles. With these services, the buyers will meet up with the seller at a location of their choice to view the vehicle. They will then provide an offer based on the value that they determine on the spot. Many claim that they will process payment immediately once the offer is accepted. The reality, however, is that these services still require a significant amount of documentation be provided and administrative work be done before the sale can be completed. Bidvest McCarthy’s valuation system can pre-empt these processes, so that all the necessary work is done by the time the inspection appointment is undertaken. McCarthy has been trading since 1936 and is one of South Africa’s largest and most respected motor vehicle retailers. The company provides a valuation platform which employs market intelligence to calculate the value of vehicles. This guarantees that sellers get a fair market price for their sale. Using the platform is quick and easy. Prospective sellers can visit the Bidvest McCarthy website and click on the “Sell My Car” option. Users must provide details on the car to register it on the portal – a process which only takes a few minutes. Once this is done, the car is priced according to market analysis that uses factors like the car make, model and mileage. The call centre will then contact the seller by phone to provide a price based on the research. If the seller is satisfied with the offer, an appointment is arranged for a full inspection of the car. The call centre does a substantial amount of work before the appointment to ensure all relevant documentation pertaining to the seller and the vehicle is obtained. This puts the dealer in a position to pay the customer immediately. With Bidvest McCarthy’s car sale solution, prices are no longer determined by “gut feel” and an individual’s perception of the used car market, but by market-driven intelligence. Click here to have your car valued accurately by Bidvest McCarthy.  This article was published in partnership with Bidvest McCarthy.