Discovery has announced that it will cap all weekly Vitality Active Rewards goals due to the impact of the coronavirus. Currently, members are required to achieve weekly fitness goals to achieve rewards including discounts through retail partners and free smoothies. However, the growing coronavirus pandemic has made it increasingly difficult for members to earn points due to the closure of businesses and limitations on group gatherings. A number of people have opted to avoid going to the gym in fear of contracting, or spreading the virus. In a statement sent out to Vitality members, the group said that all rewards will now be capped at 700 Vitality points making it easier for members to achieve their goals in spite of coronavirus restrictions. The group has also announced that it will make concessions so that members do not lose out on gym discounts. “The Vitality Gym Benefit requires members to do at least 36 gym workouts during any 12-month rolling period. When we look back at the end of March however you will only need to have done 30 workouts instead of the usual 36. “We will do the same at the end of April, too. This means that Vitality members who go to gym regularly won’t have to worry about their gym benefit dropping for at least the next two months. We will continue to monitor the situation and will update you further as new information becomes available,” it said.  Gyms As many as 219,332 coronavirus cases have reported globally. 85,745 of these cases have fully recovered, while 8,969 have died. 124,618 cases are currently active, with 6,814 reportedly in a serious or critical condition. South Africa has 116 confirmed cases, with that number expected to rise, although no deaths have been recorded locally. New regulations published on Wednesday (18 March) effectively formalised a prohibition of gatherings of more than 100 people in South Africa. In the event that a gathering of over 100 people does take place, and does not willingly disperse, authorities can move in and disperse crowds themselves, and this can lead to criminal prosecution under the Criminal Procedure Act – this includes arrest and detention. While businesses like gyms are not yet being forced to close down during the crisis, messaging from government has greatly encouraged South Africans to apply social distancing practices – imploring citizens to take control of their risk of exposure by decreasing contact with others. South Africa’s largest gym chain, Virgin Active has opted to remain open during the state of disaster. “President Ramaphosa has called on all businesses such as the management of malls, entertainment centres and other places frequented by large numbers of people to bolster their hygiene control. “We are committed to this and have stringent measures in place in answer to the President’s mandate and to ensure business continuity,” Virgin Active said. Read: Shoprite, Woolworths and Pick n Pay are rationing these items because of coronavirus panic buying 