As of Sunday, 22 March, South Africa now has 274 confirmed cases of Covid-19, health minister Dr Zeli Mkhize announced – an increase of 34 from Saturday’s announcement. The minister has also released additional information about the infections in the country, including the age profiles of those affected. The virus has so far affected more men than women in South Africa, with the majority of cases in those aged between 30 and 60 years old. As of Sunday, there have been 338,259 cases reported worldwide, with 14,457 deaths. 96,958 people have recovered from the virus, but 226,844 remain infected, with 10,314 in critical condition. Italy has overtaken China in terms of deaths as a result of the virus, with alarming numbers reported each day. The USA, meanwhile, is recording the most number of new cases, with the latest jump over 13,000. This is where the new cases in South Africa were found: Eastern Cape Province: 1 A 22-year-old male who travelled to Austria, Germany and the United Kingdom Free State Province: 2 A 49-year-old female with no international travel history
A 26-year-old male with pending travel history Gauteng Province: 7 A 58-year-old male who travelled to Pakistan and Dubai
A 49-year-old male with no international travel history
A 28-year-old female with no international travel history
A 24-year-old male with no international travel history
A 33-year-old female who travelled to the United Kingdom
A 22-year-old male who travelled to Mauritius
A 40-year-old male with pending travel history KwaZulu-Natal Province: 9 A 39-year-old male who travelled to the United Kingdom, Austria and Dubai
A 47-year-old male who travelled to France
A 45-year-old male who travelled to Germany, France, Switzerland and Austria
A 40-year old male who travelled to France and Austria
A 44-year-old male with no international travel history
A 55-year-old male with pending travel history
A 68-year-old male who travelled to Austria
A 49-year-old female with no international travel history
A 32-year-old female who travelled to Italy Mpumalanga Province: 1 A 25-year-old male who travelled to France, Germany and the Netherlands Western Cape Province: 14 A 44-year-old female who travelled to the United Kingdom, Austria and Dubai
A 33-year-old female with no international travel history
A 24-year-old female with no international travel history
A 53-year-old female who travelled to the United Kingdom
A 57-year-old male who travelled to the United Kingdom
A 30-year-old male who travelled to Italy and Switzerland
A 28-year-old female who travelled to Italy and Switzerland
A 62-year-old male who travelled to Switzerland
A 30-year-old male with no international travel history
A 71-year-old male who travelled to Portugal
A 47-year-old female with no international travel history
A 57-year-old male with no international travel history
A 54-year-old male who travelled to Italy
A 49-year-old female who travelled to Italy Address delayed South African president Cyril Ramaphosa’s Sunday address to the nation – over matters relating to the Covid-19 coronavirus – has been postponed to Monday. Minister in the Presidency Jackson Mthembu said that it is in the interest of South Africans that the president address the nation after he is properly advised. Mthembu said that the president’s meetings are expected to continue late into the night. “Among other issues is to look at the affect on our people by this coronavirus and how do we mitigate against that affect. So that is the issue before the national command council,” said Mthembu. Questions remain over how the coronavirus will impact the economy, which slipped into a technical recession in the fourth quarter. The full release is below: Latest Confirmed Cases 22 March by BusinessTech on Scribd  Read: Ramaphosa to address the nation on Monday over coronavirus – as Moody’s rating looms 