As South Africa prepares for a 21-day lockdown, strict regulations have been implemented stating which stores can remain open as part of essential services. While there has been confusion as to whether these essential services will include delivery services, a number of retailers have indicated that they will deliver to South Africa homes – albeit at a reduced capacity. The Democratic Alliance has called on the government to amend the Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (CoGTA) lockdown regulations to include food and grocery delivery services. “There are many who are confined to their homes, for whatever reason, and use food delivery services and online delivery services not as a luxury but as a necessity,” the DA said. “Furthermore, the DA is of the view that restaurants should be allowed to keep their kitchens open for food delivery and pick-up within the parameters set for hygiene – while keeping their sit-down areas closed. Linked to this, food and grocery delivery services such as UberEats, Mr. D or services run by restaurants themselves, should therefore also be allowed to operate.” The DA said it is logical that restaurants should close their sit-down areas as they have the potential of spreading the virus. “It is, however, illogical that the COGTA regulations Gazetted on Wednesday do not allow for food delivery when South Africans have been requested to remain at home,” it said. “Allowing food delivery, could decrease the movement of people to and from shops in accordance with social distancing and will go a long way in ensuring that the restaurant industry remains profitable drivers of employment.” Below are the stores which have confirmed online deliveries and have outlined which services will be on offer. Checkers Sixty60 will continue to deliver groceries and household essentials during the lockdown period but deliveries may take longer than an hour given the high order volumes which impacts delivery speed, Checkers said. “During lockdown orders have been limited to a maximum of 30 items in total and individual products are limited to three per customer. “Steps have also been taken to ensure contactless deliveries are made at customers’ homes. “Product pricing in the app is the same as what customers would pay in-store. At the moment there is no delivery fee and Sixty60 will continue to offer this service free-of-charge until 16 April. A nominal delivery fee will be introduced thereafter.” Takealot Takealot has stated it will remain open during South Africa’s 21-day lockdown. “As an essential service provider, Takealot will remain open during lockdown to safely deliver essential goods as directed by the South African government. We have temporarily disabled payment methods for all goods while we reconfigure our platform to remove the ability to purchase non-essentials.” “Customers will be notified directly about pending orders and returns in due course. Payment will be available soon, but for now: stay safe, South Africa.” Pick n Pay A spokesperson has confirmed that Pick n pay will continue to offer deliveries during the lockdown. “Our online service has been popular with customers and we will continue to serve our online customers with essential products during the lockdown,” the spokesperson said. “We have now implemented no-contact deliveries. When our drivers arrive at your address, they will ring the bell, and stand back. Once you answer the door, your order will be conveniently placed at a safe distance. “The driver will then record your name, with the date and time of service in front of you, so you won’t need to sign any paperwork. The driver will depart with no direct contact,” the group said. Pick n Pay said that it is aware that some delivery slots are booking up quickly, and is working with its delivery partners to increase the number of slots available. “If you have requested delivery to a housing estate or gated complex, please inform your access guards that the delivery of groceries is allowed during the lockdown period, as we are considered a critical service,” it said. Woolworths Woolworths Food will continue to operate during the lockdown, but its fashion, beauty and home stores and sections will shut down. The group has also set a limit of 5 units per product per customer. “We have also implemented limits on the amount of people coming into our stores at one time to ensure the required space per person while you shop,” it said. Woolworths added that it will remain open and be restocking appropriately; there is no need for panic buying. “Online delivery is in high demand, understandably, and we’re working hard to open up more delivery times where we can. Online delivery of foods will continue during lockdown,” it said. Read: What to do if your essential service certificate has not been emailed to you 