Today’s workforce uses multiple devices for work. The question is how do you manage the various platforms you have in your environment? The reality is desktop and mobile operating systems have little in common and all strive for a unique, different user experience. All have a unique workflow to provision, encrypt, deploy, secure, update and support devices. In conclusion, no one management tool is designed to support everything. Instead of focusing on the individual devices you manage, it is important to focus on the ecosystems (i.e., platform or brand) instead. Click here to find out more from Onsite Group. As Apple device adoption continues to grow in organisations around the globe, the need for an enterprise Apple management solution has never been greater. Jamf Pro has been 100% focused on Apple management for 18 years and leverages native Apple technology to preserve the Apple experience end users know and love. We keep in lockstep with Apple releases to deliver same-day operating system compatibility — meaning you and your end users get immediate access to new productivity and management features. Jamf Pro ensures that user productivity is maximised in six important ways. For more information on each of these areas, simply click the title. Deployment Delight your end users with a fully-customisable onboarding experience. Provision the perfect Mac, iPad, iPhone or Apple TV — all deployed seamlessly with the workflow of your choosing. Device Management Use configuration profiles, policies, and scripts to make your Apple devices function exactly as needed. Move beyond simple troubleshooting by automating management with our patented Smart Groups technology: a powerful way to trigger real-time alerts and actions from inventory data. App Management Streamline app management with bulk purchasing and deploying. Jamf Pro integrates with Apple Business Manager and Apple School Manager, allowing you to easily assign apps to users or devices …no Apple ID required. Deploy apps from the App Store, B2B App Store or your own custom in-house apps. When needed, you can also reclaim app licenses to reuse elsewhere. Inventory Automatically collect user, hardware, software and security device data or customise inventory specifications. Dynamic Smart Groups keep track of everything for you, including software versions and warranty expiration. Self Service Give your users access to a one-stop shop for trusted apps, company resources … and even shortcuts for troubleshooting tasks like password resets. Jamf Self Service — a fully customisable, on-demand app store that you control — is the best way to empower end users while cutting down on IT support requests. Security Secure Apple devices by leveraging native security features. Manage device settings and configurations, restrict malicious software and patch all of your Apple devices without user interaction. For endpoint protection purpose-built for Mac, use Jamf Pro with Jamf Protect. If you are looking for a way to transform the Apple experience at your organisation and maximise user productivity with Jamf’s management solutions, why not dig deeper into how your organisation could use Jamf? For more information contact the Jamf experts at Onsite, watch the Jamf Pro overview video or find more information on onsitegroup.co.za/business  This article was published in partnership with Onsite Group.