Minister of Tourism Mmamoloko Kuyabi-Ngubane has confirmed that all South African restaurants and takeaways will be closed during South Africa’s 21-day coronavirus lockdown. In a statement sent to the restaurant industry on Tuesday (24 March), Kuyabi-Ngubane said that the lockdown would apply to all: Restaurants;
Bars;
Cafes;
Coffee shops. “Such service providers have not been included on the list of what has deemed essential services during the lockdown, will not be permitted to operate and will thus need to be closed for the duration,” Kuyabi-Ngubane said. “In addition, in compliance with the nationwide lockdown all food delivery services will also need to be suspended for 21 days with effect from midnight, 26 March 2020 until midnight Thursday, 16 April 2020.” Government is expected to provide clarity on which jobs will be considered ‘essential services’ on Wednesday. However, president Cyril Ramaphosa has already confirmed that companies that are essential to the production and transportation of food, basic goods and medical supplies will remain open during the 21-day ‘lockdown’. Minister of Trade and Industry, Ebrahim Patel further outlined the types of jobs which will likely be covered by the legislation in a press briefing on Tuesday. The staff mentioned are over and above the sectors already outlined by the president, which included doctors, pharmacies, healthcare workers, petrol stations, and supermarkets. The essential staff in the following areas are being looked at for inclusion in the gazetted list: “Businesses which remain in operation during the ‘lockdown’ will be required to do so with all the staff required to ensure that the service or production is uninterrupted,” Patel said. “Businesses will also be required to take necessary protocols to ensure adequate hygiene and social distancing. “Consumer-facing businesses, like grocery stores, supermarkets, pharmacies and spaza shops, especially, will be asked to educate their staff and customers on the required protocols and to take reasonable steps to keep social distancing between customers,” he said. Read: Shoprite employees are getting a special R102 million ‘appreciation bonus’ amid coronavirus panic buying 