In light of the recent developments with regards to the spread of the Ovid-19 pandemic, the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (Icasa) has written to licensees in an effort to ensure that they make communication services available to all South Africans. These engagements take place in the context of the expected surge in usage of data as the majority of South Africans across all sectors have no option but work from home, learn from home and carry on their day to day life activities (i.e. shopping, entertainment, etc.) from home through technological means, the regulator said in a statement on Thursday (19 March). This will result in a spike in data usage, particularly as consumers also access information with regards to the pandemic – thus placing strain on the capacity of networks. “In this context it is therefore critical that the Authority consider regulatory concessions or relaxations to enable the sector to meet the demands of the business unusual environment occasioned by the pandemic,” said Icasa’s acting chairperson, Dr. Keabetswe Modimoeng. Modimoeng engagements are taking place across all sectors regulated by Icasa, and include consideration of the measures outlined below. Telecommunications Icasa is requesting all network service providers to heed the call to enable the country to mitigate the spread of Covid-19, by facilitating easy and affordable (and/or free) access to data. The authority said it is engaging the sector on possible ways of radiofrequency spectrum relief for the duration of the declared state of disaster to ease congestion, ensure good quality of broadband services, and enable licensees to lower cost of access to consumers (particularly in relation to education, emergency and other social services). “Furthermore, to the extent that the licensees will wish to tailor packages (specifically data packages) to respond to the pandemic, the authority will consider the relaxation of the tariff notification filing requirements to enable the speedy roll-out of such packages,” it said. Broadcasting Icasa is engaging with licensees to facilitate ease of access to information about the pandemic to all South Africans. All individual and class broadcasting services are required to make Public Service Announcements (PSAs) about the Covid-19 in the public interest, and as required by the relevant authorities. “Over and above this, the subscription broadcasting services licensees have been requested to open both their audio and television bouquets to consumers that do not subscribe to their services,” it said. “This will assist the public to have access to information that they can use to deal with the scourge of the virus that is facing the country.” Postal services The postal services sector (both reserved and unreserved services) has been requested to advise Icasa of measures they have taken or intend to take to assist customers during this disaster period. Read: Netflix is booming as streaming spikes 20% 