DStv has opened up a number of Supersport channels to its non-premium subscribers until 30 April 2020. Supersport 1, which is exclusively available on the DStv Premium package, will now be available on DStv Compact Plus and DStv Compact, the group said in a statement on Friday (20 March). Supersport 7, which is only available on the DStv Premium, Compact Plus and Compact packages, will also be available on the DStv Family and DStv Access packages. Earlier this week, DStv announced that it will also make a selection of channels available to all South Africans for free through its DStv Now streaming platform. DStv Now is bundled with DStv’s satellite broadcasting service, and allows subscribers to watch TV and shows from mobile devices, smart TVs, laptops, and more. The new free channel package is available to all South Africans, however, and not only DStv subscribers. The company said that in response to the coronavirus outbreak in South Africa, a number of DStv Now channels are no longer locked behind a subscription and are available to anyone with an Internet connection. DStv channels which are now available to stream for free are: 100 – DStv
180 – People’s Weather
238 – SuperSport Play
313 – PBS Kids
320 – Channel O
343 – TBN
400 – BBC World News
401 – CNN
402 – Sky News
403 – eNCA
404 – SABC News
406 – Newzroom Afrika
414 – Euronews Now Staying informed about the latest news on the virus is the first step in stopping its spread, said the company. For this reason, it has made several 24-hour news channels available. In addition to these channels, episodes of popular series are also available via the Catch Up portal on the free service, including Igazi, The River, Isibaya, Binnelanders, Suidooster, and Die Ware Naarheid. Making DStv free While the changes will be welcome to many South Africans, the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (Icasa) has said that Multichoice should make DStv free to all South Africans during the ongoing coronavirus pandemic. Icasa said it is engaging with licensees to facilitate ease of access to information about the pandemic to all South Africans. It added that all individual and class broadcasting services are required to make Public Service Announcements (PSAs) about the Covid-19 in the public interest, and as required by the relevant authorities. “Over and above this, the subscription broadcasting services licensees have been requested to open both their audio and television bouquets to consumers that do not subscribe to their services,” it said. “This will assist the public to have access to information that they can use to deal with the scourge of the virus that is facing the country.” Read: Regulator wants free DStv and mobile data bundles in South Africa due to coronavirus 