The way today’s customers interact with brands is fundamentally shifting. We are moving from the digital era to the conversational era. Customers find, compare, and buy on their mobile phones. This is exactly why instant-messaging apps have become the norm for both personal and professional communication. The interconnected digital world has made contact with customers easier, which has resulted in consumers demanding instant service and immediate results. A salesforce research study showed that 64% of consumers expect companies to respond to and interact with them in real-time, while 80% said that an immediate response to a request influences their loyalty to a brand. To solve problems they are experiencing with a company’s service or product, consumers have turned away from phone calls and embraced chat platforms. To address this, contact centres need to adapt to offer their customers platforms that boast instant and efficient customer engagement. The conversational era requires businesses to optimise their engagement with customers across a wide range of messaging channels. Where pricing and solutions are similar, the key distinguishing factor will be quality customer service. Click here to learn more about CM.com’s Customer Contact solution. Consumers generally enjoy having choices. This is why it’s essential to provide multiple routes for engagement with your brand. Younger users might opt to chat to an agent on WhatsApp, email could be better to explain in-depth problems, and SMS provides a simple fallback solution in the event that data services or access to voice communication are limited. For the more traditionally inclined customer, voice calls must remain an option. With CM.com’s Customer Contact solution, brands can meet this challenge head-on by combining several messaging channels – including SMS, WhatsApp Business, Facebook Messenger, Viber, Telegram, and Twitter – to provide customers with multiple options. Customer Contact offers your team a single workspace, containing all the conversation history in one place, as well as the ability to transfer conversations to different agents or support departments. Additionally, it provides multiple touchpoints, analytics, quick replies and out-of-office response management. If companies require automation of the interaction process, CM.com can set up a chatbot in collaboration with their business partners. This bot can respond to frequently asked questions or pass customers through the authentication process without the need for human intervention. This could help your customer service team save time which could be better spent on addressing more complicated requests. This is especially valuable when agents are required to respond timeously to flurries of extra-ordinary queries in unusual circumstances, such as the ongoing coronavirus pandemic. Chatbots can help take the strain off inundated customer service teams, so that they are able to provide quick and helpful responses during times of crisis. CM.com’s clients include major brands like BMW, King Price Insurance, Rand Mutual Assurance SafariNow, HelloPaisa and The Entertainer. Make CM.com your conversational commerce partner of choice to improve customer satisfaction and loyalty, and ultimately accelerate revenue conversion. Click here to get your company started on CM.com’s Customer Contact solution.  This article was published in partnership with CM.com.