Lancet Laboratories has introduced testing for the Covid-19 coronavirus at its molecular laboratory in South Africa. The group said that patients will only be tested if referred by a doctor and it will prioritise individuals that fulfil epidemiological and clinical case definitions as outlined by the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) To aid in this process Lancet said it has created a request form – in line with the NICD’s recommendations – that requires dates and location of travel when the patient returned from travel, as well as symptoms and the date of onset of those symptoms. Lancet said the expected turnaround time is 48 hours but is dependent on where the sample is coming from. The cash price is R1,400 and medical rates vary dependent on the scheme the patient is on. Discovery Health Medical Scheme has already indicated that if a patient test is positive, they will pay for everything from a Covid-19 benefit. If the result is negative, Discovery said the payment will come out of the medical savings account. “Doctors and patients are urged to contact the NICD directly on their hotline if they want testing to be done at NICD (082 883 9920),” it said. “If doctors want their patient to be tested at Lancet Laboratories, and there is any uncertainty that the patient meets clinical and epidemiological criteria, the Lancet virologist on call on (011 358 0800) may be contacted.” Who should be tested? Lancet advised that testing be guided by the World Health Organisation case definition of a suspect case to ensure sustainable allocation of testing reagents. This includes: A patient with acute respiratory illness (fever and at least one sign/symptom of respiratory disease (e.g., cough, shortness of breath) and with no other aetiology that fully explains the clinical presentation and a history of travel to or residence in a country/area or territory reporting local transmission of Covid-19 disease during the 14 days prior to symptom onset; or A patient with any acute respiratory illness AND having been in contact with a confirmed or probable Covid-19 case in the last 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms; or A patient with severe acute respiratory infection (fever and at least one sign/symptom of respiratory disease e.g., cough, shortness breath) and requiring hospitalisation and with no other aetiology that fully explains the clinical presentation. Read: South Africa’s richest people lost R6 billion thanks to the coronavirus 