ManpowerGroup has published the results of its 13th annual talent shortage survey, with skilled trades and technicians topping the list of South African skills shortages. The data shows that large enterprises report a significant 42% shortage in talent and desired skills, followed by 40% for medium, 31% for small, and 22% for micro-enterprises. “Compared to the global average, however, South Africa is ahead of the game, as global talent shortages average out at 54%, while South Africa is at 34%,” said ManpowerGroup South Africa managing director Lyndy van den Barselaar. “Interestingly, this number has held steady since the 2016 survey, although the makeup of shortages has shifted somewhat.” Below are the jobs that are the most in-demand in South Africa and the rest of the world. Global results reflect that skilled trades are most in demand, followed by sales and marketing, technicians, and engineering. Healthcare has entered the global top ten for the first time, at 10th position, while automation has led to office administration, contact centre employees, project managers, legal professionals and researchers dropping off the top ten. Reinforcing the message that hands-on skills are leading the pack in terms of shortages, driving and logistics is at fifth place globally, manufacturing at eighth, and construction at ninth. IT professionals are at position six on the global shortage list, followed by accounting and finance professionals in seventh place. “South Africa corresponds with the Global results that skilled trades, technicians, and sales and marketing positions are the most difficult to fill,” said van den Barselaar. “This initially reads as areas of opportunity for job seekers, however with a gloomy economy outlook expected for 2020, and with the latest ManpowerGroup Employment Outlook Survey for quarter 1 of 2020 indicating that very few employers are looking to increase their payroll, competition for the jobs that are available will be fierce. “Job seekers are encouraged to extend their professional skill sets to give themselves the necessary advantage,” said van den Barselaar. Read: South Africa enters technical recession as fourth quarter GDP sinks 