Discovery has announced that it will greatly reduce the cap on all of its weekly Vitality Active Rewards goals due to the impact of South Africa’s coronavirus lockdown. Currently, members are required to achieve weekly fitness goals to achieve rewards including discounts through retail partners and free smoothies. However, the growing coronavirus pandemic and South Africa’s subsequent lockdown will mean that members will not be allowed to leave their homes for a period of 21-days. In a statement sent out to Vitality members, the group said that all rewards will now be capped at 300 Vitality points effective from the next goal cycle starting 28 March.  Prior to the lockdown, the group announced that it will make concessions so that members do not lose out on gym discounts. “The Vitality Gym Benefit requires members to do at least 36 gym workouts during any 12-month rolling period. When we look back at the end of March however you will only need to have done 30 workouts instead of the usual 36. “We will do the same at the end of April, too. This means that Vitality members who go to gym regularly won’t have to worry about their gym benefit dropping for at least the next two months. We will continue to monitor the situation and will update you further as new information becomes available,” it said. Police minister Bheki Cele announced in a press briefing on Wednesday (25 March), that South Africans will not be allowed to leave their homes during the lockdown period – even to walk their dogs. Cele said that the decision was made to protect South Africans and encourage social distancing as he announced a number of other prohibitions. “There shall be no food at restaurants. There is no need to be on the road. There is no need to move around. There was a little bit of a story earlier on that you can walk your dogs. There shall be no dogs that will be walked,” said Cele. He added that if people wanted to walk their dogs, they could do so around the house. Read: You cannot buy alcohol or walk your dog during coronavirus lockdown as South Africa introduces strict new measures 