One of the most important factors to consider when choosing a fibre package for your business is whether it uses Active Ethernet or GPON technology. True enterprise fibre offerings which promise uncontested bandwidth and a reliable, 1:1 connection from customer premises to international Internet traffic need to implement Active Ethernet fibre deployments instead of Gigabit Passive Optical Networks (GPON) technology. This is especially important if your business requires a stable, reliable, and guaranteed connection to conduct critical, high-bandwidth tasks. Active Ethernet fibre is a point-to-point deployment which is not shared with anybody else. This means that if you take out a fibre package that uses Active Ethernet, you will have your own dedicated fibre line and port. Conversely, GPON fibre deployments are a point-to-multi-point solution – which means that multiple premises or customers are connected to a single optical line. The network hardware in this configuration then dynamically allocates bandwidth to a customer’s fibre network terminal. As only a single line is used for multiple customers in this configuration, fibre packages which offer connectivity through a GPON network are notably cheaper. However, this also means that your bandwidth is shared with other customers and will not be as reliable. Active Ethernet solves this problem by connecting your premises directly to the Internet via a single optical line. This means that you always have the full bandwidth of the connection at your disposal. This has a higher cost than a GPON connection, but it is a must-have for businesses that require high-bandwidth Internet – which is unmatched in reliability and speed. For this reason, STEM offers Active Ethernet network deployments for its True Enterprise Fibre products. This allows the company to offer dedicated fibre connections of up to 1Gbps without any shaping, throttling, capping, or acceptable-use policy. STEM offers several True Enterprise Fibre packages which remain affordable without compromising on functionality. STEM’s True Enterprise Fibre product offers a true 1:1 uncontended service with unlimited, unshaped data usage, utilizes Active Ethernet, and has a comprehensive SLA. These packages also include redundancies – with six international fibre routes, as well as local redundancies with 86 dedicated POPs and 19 data centre peering points. A dedicated account manager and 24/7 support is bundled with these enterprise packages to ensure that everything runs as smoothly as possible. Visit STEM’s fibre product page to find out more about enterprise fibre using Active Ethernet deployments.  This article was published in partnership with STEM.