A duty rests on an employee to disclose to their future employer information which may affect the employer’s decision to employ him/her. The failure to disclose such information constitutes misconduct, says Jacques van Wyk, director and Labour Law Specialist at Werksmans Attorneys. Van Wyk said that this issue was dealt with in the recent Labour Court case of Intercape Ferreira Mainliner (Pty) Ltd v McWade where the employee Rory McWade was employed by Intercape Ferreira Mainliner as a general manager in May 2015. At the time of his employment, it was anticipated that he would be groomed for, and in due course, be appointed as Intercape’s chief executive officer. However, Intercape subsequently dismissed McWade in June 2016 for, among other reasons, failing to disclose the circumstances surrounding his departure from his prior employment. McWade had been employed by the Cargo Carrier Group in Zimbabwe. CCG levelled a number of allegations of bribery, corruption and the use of company assets without permission against McWade, who was suspended. Subsequent negotiations resulted in a settlement agreement being reached with McWade. During his interview for employment with Intercape, McWade was asked, on more than one occasion (in the initial interview meeting, by the CEO of Intercape and the board), about his departure from his previous employer. He did not mention any of the circumstances surrounding his departure. He provided reasons such as “difference of opinion” on ethical matters and “new owners, Zim Economy”. When asked by the board if there was anything to be concerned about regarding his departure from previous employment, he once again did not mention the circumstances surrounding his departure. McWade referred an unfair dismissal dispute to the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration. The arbitrator found that his dismissal was unfair because, among others, Intercape failed to establish that it had sought specific information from McWade regarding the circumstances surrounding his departure from his previous employer and that no response given by McWade was false. Ruling Intercape subsequently approached the Labour Court to review the decision of the CCMA, Van Wyk said. It argued that the arbitrator incorrectly interpreted the law and that the finding was unreasonable. The Labour Court upheld the review. The Labour Court held that the arbitrator did not seem to: The Labour Court held that the failure to disclose must pertain to material information, “at least in the sense that the prospective employer would have conducted its own enquiry into the relevant facts and determined eligibility or sustainability for employment as a consequence.” “The court took into account the seniority of McWade’s position and held that despite the settlement agreement reached between him and his previous employer and that he resigned and was never found guilty of misconduct, there was still a duty to disclose the circumstances that led to his departure from his previous employment,” Van Wyk said. “The non-disclosure in the circumstances was material and any reasonable employer would have wanted to investigate the facts before concluding the recruitment process. “The court set aside the arbitrator’s award and found that the McWade’s dismissal was substantively and procedurally fair.” Importance of the case Where there is material information that may impact upon an employer’s decision to appoint an employee this must be disclosed by the employee, Van Wyk said. “Failure to disclose in such circumstances will constitute misconduct which may lead to dismissal,” Van Wyk said. “Employer’s should expressly mention this obligation to applicants for employment and cater for issues of non-disclosure in their contracts of employment.” Read: Working from home because of the coronavirus in South Africa – how your pay will be affected 