Money is tight and petrol is brutally expensive, despite the recent slide in the oil price. A massive retreat of international petroleum prices will likely lead to a reduction in fuel prices in April, in-spite of a weaker rand against a resurgent dollar. However, these declines must be weighed against the 25 cent increases to the fuel levies announced by the Finance Minister in February which come into effect in April. When a full tank is costing you more than R1000, it’s well worth exploring ways to drive more fuel-efficiently. If you follow these simple tips from Jeff Osborne of Gumtree Autos SA, you can save yourself a big whack on your fuel bill, especially on long-distance trips. 1. Drive gently. Rapid take-offs, racing from traffic light to traffic light, and slamming on your brakes will use more fuel. Research has shown that aggressive driving can increase your fuel usage by up to 33%. 2. Accelerate and decelerate smoothly. Take at least 15 seconds to get to 80km/h – a relatively gentle start in the low gears, with a more rapid shift through the middle gears before settling at an economic speed in top gear. Read the road ahead and anticipate robots and stop streets to ensure a smooth deceleration. 3. Take it slow. Cruise at 80-100 kmh, anything more and you are both endangering yourself and using extra fuel. 4. Plan ahead. Leave earlier to allow more time so you can travel slowly and avoid peak hours and roads with extensive lengthy repair works which demand fuel-guzzling idling time. 5. Keep the aircon off. Tough to do on hot days but you’re a/c compressor is run by a belt in the engine, which uses more fuel when activated. In an older vehicle, the aircon can account for about 5% of a car’s annual fuel bill. Air conditioning uses the most fuel when the car idles, so keep it off until you’ve reached cruising speed. 6. Load lightly. Any extra weight in the vehicle adds to your fuel bill. Anything on the roof will add to drag, and bike racks, trailers or caravans require significant extra juice. Open windows also negatively impact on a car’s aerodynamics. 7. Correct tyre pressure. The wrong pressures will not only affect your fuel consumption, but also your tyre life. Proper wheel balance and alignment are also important for optimal fuel economy. Read: Here is the expected petrol price for April 