Checkers customers can now insure their pets from R89 a month through an exclusive insurance product underwritten by Outsurance. The retailer said that insurance options range from R89 to R245 a month depending on coverage: accidental cover for injuries; core cover for injuries; illnesses and vet visits; or comprehensive cover for accidents, vet visits and routine care such as vaccines, sterilisation, dental scaling and deworming. The service includes: A flat-rate fee and no waiting period;
A fast, paperless claims process;
Fixed excess regardless of claim;
Multi-pet discounts. The Shoprite Group, which owns Checkers, said that the new pet insurance is in line with a push into financial services. Other features which the group plans to or is in the process of introducing include: QR payments – which will allow shoppers to pay for groceries with their phones;
New money market account – a free transactional account which can be used to pay bills, buy airtime, data and savings stamps as well as to send and receive money. “The group continues to look for new fintech innovations in line with global trends, but always with a keen focus on what its customers want,” Shoprite said. It added that it plans to announce additional product launches before the end of the year. Money market account In August, Shoprite launched a new money market account, with the group ultimately planning to offer the transactional capabilities of a full banking account. The retailer said that the free transactional account is available on the new Shoprite app or USSD and its main benefits include: No monthly fees, no load fees, no transaction fees;
No debit orders – customers are in full control of their money;
No forms, no fees, no FICA – anyone can open an account. The group said that customers can use the account to access many of the services available at its in-store money market counters, such as paying utility bills, buying airtime, data and Savings Stamps, as well as sending and receiving money. The money market account will also allow customers to transact online, including at Computicket, where they can book bus tickets online or watch their favourite streaming events. They will also soon be able to use their money market account on other websites, making e-commerce more accessible to everyone. “Money Market is a brand that our customers have come to love and trust over the years,” said Jean Olivier, general manager: Financial Services for the Shoprite Group. “We are extending its services to help our customers to transact securely and to save, as we are acutely aware of the importance of saving at this time.” Read: This economic activity highlights where in South Africa businesses are suffering the most