Discovery has announced a number of changes to its Vitality rewards programme. Key updates include a once-off special Vitality points recognition initiative in response to the impact of Covid-19 lockdown, the expansion of its physical activity offering, a new partnership with Nike, the reintroduction of travel benefits, and new healthy convenience meal rewards. These are in addition to the enhancements to Discovery Miles programme, the group said in a statement on Wednesday (30 September). These changes are outlined in more detail below. Once-off reward Lockdown imposed constraints on people’s ability to engage in preventive screenings and physical activity as fully as they normally would. To support and motivate its members, Vitality has announced a once-off special Vitality points recognition initiative that would give members credit for screening and physical activity they did in 2019, to top up their 2020 Vitality points where applicable. “We understand that the restrictions associated with lockdown have reduced physical activity and have constrained members’ ability to access screening services,” said Discovery Vitality chief executive Dinesh Govender. “Our ability to support our members in pursuit of a healthy lifestyle is more relevant than ever in the context of Covid-19, backed by research showing that engaging in Vitality reduces Covid-19 mortality risk by 37%. “It is therefore critical that we have the flexibility in our approach to keep members motivated this year. These updates and new features reflect Vitality’s commitment to continuous innovation to give consumers excellent reasons to get and stay healthy.” Govender said that a special Vitality points allocation is in place to support those who were unable to participate in healthy behaviours as they would have done this year. It will work as follows: Members will be awarded the higher of their 2019 and 2020 Vitality Health Check and Vitality Fitness Assessment Vitality points.
If they have not yet completed one of these assessments this year and are not comfortable to complete one before the end of the year, they will be awarded the same Vitality points that they earned last year.
Members still have time during the rest of the year to complete these assessments, should their circumstances allow. Points for additional screenings, such as completing a Pap smear or colonoscopy, and visiting the dentist will be awarded for 2020 if members completed these screenings last year. Points will also be awarded for a 2019 flu vaccination, as it was in short supply this year. For physical activity, members will be awarded the higher of the physical activity points earned over the period January to September 2019 or January to September 2020.
They can continue earning Vitality points by getting active until the end of 2020 – through a variety of online workouts, virtual events, safely attending their gym, and many more options. Based on these criteria, the additional Vitality points will be automatically allocated by the end of October 2020 – no action is required from members. Nike partnership Discovery said that in 2021 Vitality members will be able to earn Vitality points and spend Discovery Miles at over 300 additional physical and digital fitness facilities. This expansion is in response to members expressing interest in a variety of exercise formats, as we well as the growth in digital fitness and home workouts, the group said. To ensure that members are well-equipped for their workouts, Vitality is redesigning its sport gear and fitness devices benefit to provide upfront discounts of up to 75% at the point of sale. Vitality has also partnered with Nike to make sport a daily habit. The partnership between Vitality and Nike means that in 2021, Vitality members will unlock Vitality rewards that they can access at Nike Concept Stores. Travel benefits Vitality said that its travel platform will reopen this week for holiday accommodation and car hire bookings. “International flight bookings will follow soon thereafter, and we expect kulula.com and British Airways domestic flight bookings to open in late October,” the group said,. When domestic flight bookings open, Vitality members will be rewarded with upfront discounts of up to 75%, as well as 72 hours’ early access for flight bookings. “Discovery Bank clients will enjoy their maximum discounts on domestic flights until the end of November, based on their product type and Vitality Money status. “Together with Priority Lane access at OR Tambo domestic departures for Discovery Bank Black and Purple cardholders, travel will be more rewarding than ever before.” Convenience meals Vitality said it will enhance its nutrition benefits beyond rewards on HealthyFood at Woolworths and Pick n Pay, and healthy dining options via Uber Eats and at a range of partner restaurants. “The programme is adapting to support members in accessing healthy ready-made meals to suit their busy lifestyles,” it said. “In 2021, HealthyDining rewards will also include 25% back on healthier convenience frozen meals and meal kits from Frozen for You, UCOOK, We Are Food and Daily Dish.” Read: Take-home pay in South Africa right now