Businesses have gone digital across almost every area of operations, including document signing. Companies are now switching to electronic signatures – which are faster, simpler, and legally binding. Click here to learn more about Kyocera’s e-signature solution. This next-generation document signing technology also provides tangible benefits to businesses. Traditionally, businesses needed to print documents, manually sign them, scan them back into a digital format, and mail them back to the recipient. In some cases, the business would have to take things a step further by physically mailing the signed document through postal services. Instead of going through these tedious processes, e-signature technology lets you open the digital document, insert your e-signature, and save the document. Not only does this give you more time to focus on pressing tasks, it also saves you money because you don’t need to pay for ink, packaging, and shipping costs. You also don’t need access to a scanner or printer – you can sign documents from your laptop or smart device instantly. Another major benefit of e-signatures is that they are more secure than a physically-signed document. While physical documents can be tampered with – and in many cases, must be delivered physically by a third party – e-signature software offers robust encryption to ensure that when you sign a document digitally no one can edit or tamper with it. Having these documents stored digitally is another major advantage of e-signatures, as you will not have to worry about filing signed documents in physical cabinets – which can also be compromised. When it comes to signing documents digitally, there are three main types of signatures that your business may need: Electronic signature – These are used to indicate a person’s consent to sign.
Digital signature – Cryptographic codes embedded into the document to add increased security.
SA Advanced Electronic Signatures (AeSign) – This offers the highest level of security. Each of these types of signatures offer value in different contexts, and an elite electronic and digital signature solution will offer businesses all three. Kyocera is a leading document solutions provider that drives efficiency in many South African businesses. It offers a comprehensive electronic and digital signature solution that provides all three key forms of electronic signature – meaning you have all the tools to streamline your document signing processes. While certain document types, in certain industries are not yet legally allowed to use e-signatures in South Africa, all industries can use and benefit from the power of e-signatures in a substantial capacity. Kyocera continues to grow its portfolio of clients in this space, which already includes customers in a variety of fields as diverse as Insurance, Education, and Technology. Click here to learn more about how e-signatures can streamline your document signing process. This article was published in partnership with Kyocera.