If you want the best picture quality possible on a TV, then look no further than Samsung’s lineup of 8K QLED TVs. Samsung’s QLED range leverages years of display evolution to deliver a range of high-end TVs, headlined by the QLED Q900R – boasting an 8K resolution with HDR support and a 98-inch panel. 8K QLED delivers 16-times the resolution of Full HD, with each panel featuring 33 million pixels and image quality unlike any other product on the market. Click here to learn more about Samsung QLED technology Samsung’s 8K QLED TVs can also automatically optimise screen brightness and TV sound control to any viewing condition and content, thanks to the company’s intelligent Quantum processor. The secret behind this powerful technology is the quantum dots embedded in the QLED displays, which provide enhanced brightness levels compared to other TV technologies. Quantum dots are finely-tuned particles that can express real colours at 100% colour volume, and technology supports Quantum HDR – which provides the ability to play HDR video at up to 8K resolutions. Additionally, Samsung’s QLED 8K panels offer Direct Full Array backlighting, deliverning deeper blacks, less light blooming, and a more profound depth of detail by controlling the backlight. Unlike OLED panels, QLED TVs don’t use organic elements – which means they are effectively immune to screen burn-in. Burn-in is a display problem in which certain facets of an image shown on a TV screen for an extended period affect how it displays images and video. Samsung’s QLED TV range does not suffer from this issue, however, due to its quantum dot technology. The intelligent Quantum processor built into Samsung QLED TVs adapts brightness, depth, and sound control in real-time to perfectly suit your viewing environment. Powered by the Quantum processor, AI upscaling also analyzes and upscales every scene you watch, even if the native resolution of the content you are watching is 4K or lower. This upscaling uses data from millions of videos to classify aspects like textures and edges, and to optimally upscale each specific scene. 4K content viewed on Samsung’s 4K QLED models will also look better than on any other 4K TV, thanks to the image and audio enhancements delivered by its Quantum Dot technology. This suite of video enhancements, paired with the ability to upscale content dynamically and unparalleled colour depth and quality, makes Samsung’s QLED TVs the first choice for buyers looking for the best-quality TV on the market. This article was published in partnership with Samsung.