Tourism minister Mmamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane has published a directive which provides further clarity on the country’s move to a level 1 lockdown in the sector. In the gazette, Kubayi-Ngubane confirmed that weddings and other events are permitted under the level 1 lockdown, subject to existing health and safety regulations. “Attendance at a venue for a wedding, exhibition or any other function is limited to 50% of the capacity of the venue with a maximum of 250 persons at an indoor venue and a maximum of 500 persons at an outdoor venue,” she said. She said that persons participating through electronic platforms are not included in these limitations and all hygienic conditions and physical distancing measures are adhered to, in order to limit the exposure of persons to Covid-19. The tourism minister has also made it a requirement for restaurants, exhibitions, weddings and other venues to obtain a ‘certificate of occupancy’. “The owner or operator of a restaurant, a conferences, meetings, weddings, exhibitions or functions venue, a hotel, lodge, bed and breakfast, timeshare facility, resort, guest house or a casino must display a certificate of occupancy which sets out the maximum number of persons the facility may hold,” she said. These regulations come into immediate effect. You can read the full directive below. Level 1 regulations South Africa officially moved to a level 1 lockdown at 00h01 on Monday morning (21 September). In addition to the re-opening of the country borders, an updated curfew time and continued restrictions around the sale of alcohol, the regulations also introduce new rules around gatherings. The updated guidelines include: Gatherings will be allowed as long as the number of people do not exceed 50% of the normal capacity of a venue –  up to a maximum of 250 people for indoor gatherings and 500 people for outdoor gatherings;
Maximum capacity at funerals has been increased to 100 people;
Night vigils are still prohibited;
Venues such as gyms and recreational facilities have had limits increased to 50% of total capacity;
Existing restrictions on sporting events remain in place.  Read: The Joburg field hospital where half a million rand has been spent on each patient