A recent flood of cyberattacks has crippled multiple businesses and government institutions around the world. By way of example, earlier this year, websites related to religion, voluntary programmes, charity, and several other areas were compromised to selectively trigger a drive-by download attack resulting in a malicious programme set up on the targets’ devices and subsequently, multiple businesses around the world were compromised. All in all, cybercriminals created the situation, in which the victim without a cybersecurity solution installed on a device, would get infected by simply visiting a certain website. In the campaign, named Holy Water, such traps had been set-up on websites that belong to personalities, public bodies, charities and various organisations. While multiple entities globally suffered from such attacks, the businesses and institutions with compromised websites also suffered reputational damages. With the increased reliance on digital technologies, malicious attackers see more opportunities to exploit weak cybersecurity systems. Click here to learn more about Kaspersky Threat Intelligence. Government and businesses must therefore acquire effective solutions to fight all types of cyberattacks to prevent a breakdown of services and data theft. While security solutions can help to prevent the infection, the cybersecurity industry is now going further to protect businesses and individuals at the earlier stage. To do it, ‘threat hunters’ gather intelligence data and employ the information in the most effective way. So, how does it work and what could large businesses do to protect themselves from being compromised, money loss, and reputational losses? Here is Kaspersky’s outline of the most up to date threat intelligence tools and mechanisms: Tracking, analysing, interpreting and mitigating constantly evolving IT security threats is a massive undertaking, however, this is where the Kaspersky Threat Intelligence Portal comes in. The solution leverages rich threat data gathered over two decades by Kaspersky , as well as advanced machine learning technologies, and research from a unique pool of global experts. It can also be integrated with existing security systems, including SIEM, firewalls and intrusion detection-devices. This provides a 360-degree view of the tactics and tools used by threat actors to help businesses maintain cyberattack immunity, even against previously unseen threats. Kaspersky pulls its threat data from more than 100 million users across the globe. It also employs web crawlers, BotFarm, spam traps, sensors, open-source intelligence, and industry-led and private communities to provide up-to-the-minute and immediately actionable cyberthreat data. Kaspersky Threat Intelligence users also get access to the following reports: APT Intelligence Reporting
Financial Threat Reporting
ICS Reporting Additionally, Kaspersky Threat Intelligence users can improve incident investigation and threat hunting through the solution’s Cloud Sandbox and Threat Lookup features. Cloud Sandbox allows Kaspersky to detect more than 350,000 new malicious objects every day, giving businesses immediate insight into the nature of any file to allow for a rapid response to security incidents. Threat Lookup lets the user perform a real-time search of over 20PB of data on threats, legitimate objects, and their relationships, to carry out effective and complex incident investigations. Kaspersky’s experts construct a comprehensive picture of a business’ attack status, revealing evidence of past, present, and future attacks – and identifying possible weak spots which can be exploited. This allows the business to make informed decisions on budget, resource, and staff allocations to focus their defensive strategy on prime targets. Kaspersky Threat Intelligence is suited for all manner of entities – including enterprises, government, and financial services, as well as managed security and critical infrastructure providers. Click here to request a demo of the Kaspersky Threat Intelligence Portal now. This article was published in partnership with Kaspersky.