Tourism minister Mmamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane says that she is aware of non-compliance by some South African restaurants since the country moved to a level 2 lockdown on 18 August. Kubayi-Ngubane said she has received numerous complaints from ordinary law-abiding citizens, other operators and employees about the situation in these restaurants. “This practice of disregarding the regulations, directions and protocols reportedly include practices such as restaurants operating during curfew, offering take-away alcohol and none adherence to social distancing or wearing of masks as required by law amongst other violations. “This does not only risk these businesses licenses but also endangers the safety of their loyal customers and dedicated workers.” Kubayi-Ngubane says she has now written letters to restaurants insisting and appealing yet again for their co-operation, as the sector cannot risk having any of its hard-earned gains reversed. She warned that continued flouting of the regulations may lead to further restrictions on the sector – which will have a devastating impact on the recovery of the sector. Rules for restaurants The level 2 lockdown rules for restaurants are largely the same as those which were introduced as part of the advanced level 3 requirements. The obvious exception is the reintroduction of alcohol sales for on-site consumption during curfew hours (until 22h00). This curfew restriction extends to all establishments – including hotel bars – and that no alcohol may be sold to anyone after 22h00. While there are no hard limits on how many people may be in a restaurant, the space between tables needs to be in line with social distancing rules, and the number of people allowed in should be relative to a restaurant’s capacity with these limitations in place. Different restaurants have different capacities and carry different space, so a single number wouldn’t make sense. The limit of 50 people applies only to gatherings, such as weddings and conferences and events, etc. The level 3 lockdown rules published at the end of June provide the rules that restaurants will have to adhere to as follows: Restaurants, fast food outlets and coffee shops must keep a daily record of the full names, ID number or passport number, nationality, nature of position (i.e. temporary, casual or permanent), residential address, and cell phone numbers of all employees and delivery persons; Ensure that every employee and delivery person is screened on arrival for shifts and on departing after shifts; Provide employees with masks to wear and hand sanitiser; Ensure that an area is demarcated for the collection of orders for delivery that is separate from the place where food is prepared; Ensure that a contactless pickup zone for customers whose orders are ready to be collected is designated; Sit-down restaurants must conduct a screening questionnaire and take precautionary measures to protect the person and other persons on the premises. Such measures may include denying such a person access to the premises; Ensure that customers or guests wear masks at all times while they are on their premises except when eating or drinking; Ensure that customers or guests queue at least one and a half meters apart behind each other or sideways; Remove excess chairs /stools and tables or tables combined to enlarge the floor space while reducing and spreading seat capacity to enforce distancing of one and a half meters between guests or customers; Consider a reservation system to manage demand, and help ensure that capacity limits are adhered to; No buffets may be offered to guests for self -service; Food may only be plated and/or provided in covered single portions; Guests may pickup pre-portioned items and any other buffet service should be handled by food service employees only from behind Perspex or similar protective shields; Menus must be replaced with non -touch options or sanitised after each guest use; Where possible and for instance while taking orders, waiting staff must stand at least a meter from tables; Where possible, tablecloths should be removed from tables. Only essential items such as salt and pepper, should remain on tables and be sanitised after each guest; Remove excess chairs /stools and tables or tables combined to enlarge the floor space while reducing and spreading seat capacity to enforce distancing of one and a half meters between guests or customers; Items on waiting stations must be minimised; Clearing and cleaning systems with designated containers for different items and sealable refuse containers for food waste must be implemented and used. Read: South Africa set for stricter rules around cigarettes and smoking