The Old Mutual Rewards programme is a win-win situation for South Africans. It rewards customers for good financial behaviour – meaning that those who use it can simultaneously improve their level of financial education and earn rewards. Click here to join now. It is an incredibly simple process and offers great benefits with no drawbacks – meaning there is no reason not to sign up. This is how it works. Signing up to Old Mutual Rewards is very easy. Simply visit this webpage and fill in the appropriate details. You don’t even have to be an existing Old Mutual client to sign up – anyone can register and access the programme’s great benefits. Those who have signed up to Old Mutual Rewards can earn points through a variety of actions and tasks. These actions and tasks are focused around improving your financial knowledge, and include completing various money management courses, using financial tools and calculators, speaking to an adviser, and requesting a credit report. A table outlining the full list of earning opportunities, as well as how many points you can earn from each of these activities, is below. Note that 10 points equals R1, but there are deals available from time to time which could make the points even more valuable. One way to earn points is through a learning platform which was built by Old Mutual and is dedicated to helping you manage your money better. This platform teaches you how to plan for your retirement, invest in property, cope with debt, set up a side hustle, and much more. As part of the Moneyversity platform, not only will you watch videos; you will also play games, read infographics, and make use of Old Mutual’s financial calculators – all forming part of a comprehensive learning experience. You will earn Old Mutual Reward points for the following: 5 points for watching a video.
5 points for reading an article.
5 points for completing a quiz.
10 points for completing a course. In total, there are 750 Old Mutual Rewards points up for grabs – so get learning! Old Mutual customers also earn points for holding Old Mutual products. Points are allocated monthly based on the tier you are on. Your Old Mutual Rewards tier is determined by the number of financial needs met with Old Mutual: Tier 1: 0-1 needs met.
Tier 2: 2-3 needs met
Tier 3: 4 needs met
Tier 4: 5 needs met or assets > R25m
Tier 5: 6+ needs met or assets > R50m These tiers are outlined below. Old Mutual Rewards members with a Money Account receive points for swipes on your Money Account. Points are awarded at a rate of 1% of spend on each Money Account swipe. In other words, members will receive one point for every R100 spent. To maintain their Money Account tier, you only need to have a minimum deposit of R2500 per month, swipe your card five times in the previous month (for a minimum of R100 each) and have one debit order coming off your account. Old Mutual Rewards further provides members with financial tools that empower them to manage their money better and improve their budgeting skills through 22Seven. 22seven assists you in drawing up your monthly budget, tracking your expenses and setting your financial goals – all while earning points along the way. Once you have earned your points, you can spend them at a variety of businesses and organisations with which Old Mutual has partnered. These include restaurants, supermarkets, pharmacies, clothing shops, mobile networks, Uber, charities and even movie houses. Some recommended ways to spend your points include: Invest your points – You can add your points towards selected Old Mutual products you own.
Make purchases – You can buy vouchers or spend your points at certain Old Mutual partners. For the latter, you will receive a unique QR code to use at the till point.
Donate – You may use your points to donate to selected charities.
Buy airtime and data – You can spend you points on airtime, data, and SMS bundles with Vodacom, MTN, Telkom, and Cell C. In addition, Old Mutual Rewards members qualify for special discounts which will automatically be applied to their travel bookings. This entitles you to R150 off any domestic flight bookings, or R250 off any international flight bookings. T’s and C’s apply. There really is no reason to delay – sign up to the Old Mutual Rewards programme today!  This article was published in partnership with Old Mutual.