Whether you’re looking for HBO series, Mzansi favourites or action movies, streaming service Showmax has a unique combination of hit African content, first and exclusive international series, the best kids’ shows, and live news and sport, all with zero ads. Don’t miss out on the chance to get Showmax for three months for only R149, instead of R99 per month. That’s a 50% discount.  Get the deal now. The deal is valid until 30 June 2020. Click here to save 50% on Showmax now. From long-running soapies like The River and The Queen to hot reality shows like Madam and Mercy, coming express from Mzansi Magic, there are plenty of local highlights on Showmax. Binge all of Somizi & Mohale: The Union, relive both seasons of The Real Housewives of Johannesburg, or watch local movies like the hilarious Matwetwe, which was directed by Kagiso Lediga (Queen Sono) and executive produced by Black Coffee. If it’s Afrikaans content you’re after, Showmax has everything from hit movies like Kanarie, Skemerson and Die Seemeeu, starring Sandra Prinsloo and Marius Weyers, to soapies like Getroud met Rugby and Binnelanders. Plus, there are lifestyle shows like Jan, starring SA’s own Michelin-starred chef, Jan Hendrik van der Westhuizen. Those who like their entertainment factual are also not forgotten. Local documentaries like How to Steal a Country (coming first to Showmax on 23 April) and Whispering Truth to Power, about former public protector Thuli Madonsela, give a window into the inner workings of South Africa. And did you know you can now stream eight news channels live, from SABC News to CNN to BBC World News? There are of course also thousands of international movies and series to choose from. New in April there’s the fourth season of Issa Rae’s funny, sharp Insecure, and The Outsider, a new series based on the novel by Stephen King and coming express to Showmax from M-Net from 23 April. Plus, there’s a ton of Adult Swim content, including new series Primal and new episodes of Robot Chicken. More Rick & Morty S4 is coming to Showmax first in May. Movie buffs will love the selection of films from arthouse to action, featuring Hollywood’s biggest names. It’s all waiting to stream at a bargain price. For a single monthly fee, get unlimited access. Start and stop when you want, and cancel anytime – there’s no contract. Stream Showmax using apps for smart TVs, smartphones, tablets, computers, media players and gaming consoles. Manage data consumption using the bandwidth capping feature. No internet? No problem – download shows to smartphones and tablets to watch later offline.  This article was published in partnership with Showmax.