Health minister Dr Zweli Mkhize has confirmed that there are now 5,647 positive Covid-19 cases in South Africa. This is up by 297 from the 5,350 Covid-19 cases announced on Wednesday by the minister, when 354 cases were reported – the highest number of cases in a 24-hour cycle to date. A total of 207,530 tests have been conducted so far, up from a total of 197,127 before. Over 10,000 tests were done in the last day.  Globally, coronavirus recoveries pushed through the 1 million mark, with in excess of 3.2 million cases, and 228,611 deaths. Out of the current 1,997,605 infected patients, 59,956 (3%) are deemed to be serious or critical. About a third of patients in UK hospitals with Covid-19 died from the disease, according to the findings of a study of more than 16,000 people with the virus, Bloomberg reported. The research provides an early insight into the deadliness of the virus in the UK which has one of the highest tolls from the pandemic in Europe. Led by researchers from Edinburgh University, Liverpool University and Imperial College London, the study pulled information from 166 hospitals in England, Wales and Scotland about Covid-19 patients. At the end of the research period, about a third of the patients had died, almost half had been discharged and 17% were still receiving care at the hospital. The researchers found higher mortality rates among men and obese people. They also found that mortality was high in patients in general wards who were not admitted to intensive care units. The study encapsulates about 15% of all people who’ve tested positive in the country and the median age of the patients was 72, Bloomberg said. Level 4: the new normal While some in South Africa will breathe a sigh of relief that their lives will slowly return to normal, the road ahead is still steeped with sacrifices and curfews that need to be obeyed. During a press briefing on Wednesday, it emerged that people will from Friday be permitted a once-off movement from one province to another. From May 1, as the country kicks off level 4 Covid-19 lockdown regulations, 1.5 million workers will return to work posts as will fitness junkies, who will resume training regimens, albeit under strict conditions. The regulations, which were gazetted on Wednesday by Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs Minister, Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, will also see citizens now able to place orders to be delivered from their favourite restaurants. You can now also buy your cosmetic products to pamper yourself and do your own manicure and pedicure at home. Sale of cigarettes and alcohol prohibited The sale of cigarettes and alcohol, however, remains prohibited. Any form of liquor is also not permitted to be distributed. “The non-sale of alcohol has freed the hospitals; our emergency hospitals and units are normal now. Our ICUs are not filled with people who have been stabbed or shot or raped or so on,” said Dlamini-Zuma. “Besides that, alcohol attracts crowds. Very few people enjoy drinking alone. Besides that, it means that the police can do what they need to do and all the enforcement officers. The hospital can look after the sick and not the emergencies that comes from effects of alcohol.” Exercise “You can leave to go exercise under strict conditions,” said Dlamini-Zuma. Under the new regulation, people can cycle, run and walk within their neighbourhood of about a 5 km radius between 6 am and 9 am. Movement of people Under level 4, children who had visited relatives before the lockdown would be permitted to move back home. Dlamini-Zuma said more people would be going to work under level 4, however, she stressed that people should stay at home after knocking off. “It’s not a licence to visit your relatives or friends. So, between 8pm and 5am, if you’re not having a permit to be out, you have to be at home,” she added. Those who work in Gauteng but live in neighbouring provinces like North West, Mpumalanga or Limpopo will be permitted to travel daily but should be in possession of a permit. However, movements between provinces will not be allowed. Read: South Africa downgraded deeper into junk by S&P 