The number of confirmed Covid-19 coronavirus cases in South Africa has climbed to 2,272, health minister Dr Zweli Mkhize said on Monday evening (13 April). This represents an increase of 99 new cases since Sunday with 83,663 tests conducted so far. The minister said that two new deaths have been recorded, with total deaths rising to 27. Globally, coronavirus cases moved to more than 1.86 million, with more than 115,000 reported deaths, and 434,000 recoveries. Seventy coronavirus vaccines are in development globally, with three already being tested in human trials, the World Health Organisation said. The furthest along in the clinical process is an experimental vaccine developed by Hong Kong-listed CanSino Biologics Inc and the Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, which is in phase two, Bloomberg reported. The other two being tested in humans are treatments developed separately by US drugmakers Moderna Inc and Inovio Pharmaceuticals Inc. Parts of the US, the epicenter of the virus, may be ready to ease emergency measures in May, said Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. US cases moved to more than 560,000, with in excess of 22,000 deaths. Meanwhile, the number of confirmed cases of coronavirus in Africa is closing in on 15,000, according to the latest statistics reported by the Africa Centres for Disease Control.  Message from the president Gender-based violence and the vandalism of infrastructure during the Covid-19 lockdown will not be tolerated, president Cyril Ramaphosa has warned. To this end, in his weekly newsletter message, the president urged communities to play their part in reporting such misdemeanours. The strong message comes in the wake of reports of schools being burgled, trashed burnt, critical Eskom cables stolen while women and children were being murdered during the outbreak. “When the lockdown is lifted and learning resumes, thousands of our children will have no school to return to, depriving them of the right to education. “Eskom has also reported an increase in cable theft and vandalism of its infrastructure since the lockdown began, resulting in power supply interruptions and damage that will cost a considerable amount to repair,” said the president. Public property is being vandalised – while the entire country is experiencing hardship because of the lockdown – is a demonstration of utter disrespect and disregard for the majority of South Africans who are law-abiding, he said. “Unfortunately, criminals are also preying on the weak and vulnerable,” said the president. To criminals, Ramaphosa warned that the criminal justice system is not on leave and ready to deal with transgressors. “You will be arrested, you will be tried and you will be put behind bars,” he said. Read: The DA has a different lockdown strategy – this is what it looks like 