South African food delivery brand, Mr D Food, says it will resume full operations from Friday 1 May 2020, in accordance with South Africa’s level 4 regulations. The food delivery service said it is ready to deliver from restaurants across the country. “As a South African brand, we are proud to offer a crucial service during lockdown to ensure we are all doing our part to support government initiatives to promote social distancing,” said Mr D Food chief executive officer, Devin Sinclair. “Delivering from restaurants, convenience stores and Checkers MediRite pharmacies on the platform is just one way we are supporting South Africans during the lockdown period while making sure they can stay indoors.” Much like the rest of the restaurant industry, Mr D Food said it has been hard hit by the lockdown. The opening up of restaurants for food delivery will allow Mr D Food and restaurants to try recover from the devastating impact that 5 weeks of lockdown has had on all businesses, it said. “We will also be implementing initiatives to support the restaurant industry as they reopen. As a first step, we are introducing a commission relief scheme which reduces the commission rates for the vast majority of our restaurants partners. “We have also allocated marketing funds to drive promotional initiatives to generate orders and revenue for neighborhood restaurants. “Lastly, we will be launching a new feature in the Mr D Food app that will allow customers to support their favourite restaurants, by making a Covid-19 contribution directly to the restaurant when placing a delivery order,” said Sinclair. The company said that contactless delivery has now been implemented, with drivers instructed not to make physical contact with customers and to maintain a safe distance. Bags will be placed on a surface indicated by the customer, the driver will then back away and allow the customer to safely pick out the order themselves. Cash payments have been deactivated and customers can use one of the other secure electronic payment methods available in-app; credit or debit card, instant EFT or eBucks. Enhanced hygiene practices have also been implemented, it said. Drivers’ bags are frequently cleaned, and all drivers have access to hand sanitiser with clear instructions to sanitise their hands before and after each delivery or collection. All drivers are now temperature tested daily at each of the driver hubs. Protective masks have been rolled out for all drivers. Read: Which of your favourite fast food outlets will be opening for delivery on Friday 