Keeping people safe and healthy in unsure times is a very modern challenge. Authorities and companies alike are scrambling to find ways to help manage this and reduce risks. Hikvision offers fever screening solutions to help them build processes and infrastructures to prevail. Click here to find out more about Hikvision Temperature is an important indicator of physical health. In many scenarios, people with abnormal temperatures could have a health issue. To have a proper effect, it’s crucial that this is detected and monitored quickly and accurately. But traditional methods of temperature measurement are time-consuming and can put operators at risk. At times like these, technology can provide an efficient alternative. With advanced detectors and algorithms, Hikvision’s Fever Screening Thermographic Cameras are designed to detect elevated skin-surface temperatures. This means they can be used for rapid and preliminary fever screening in hospitals, stations, airports and other public places. The cameras have an accuracy rate of up to ±0.5°C, giving a valuable indication of which persons should be further tested for fever. It takes just one second to detect a person’s skin-surface temperature, and the system can measure multiple people at the same time. This means it is efficient in an entrance, for example, where a number of people will be passing at the same time. The use of AI technology means non-human heat sources, for example a hot coffee, are ignored, reducing false alarms. Once a person is identified by the camera as having a higher skin-surface temperature, they can be flagged for further measurement. The system can also be useful to monitor a situation, providing useful anonymous data from a safe distance supporting end users’ potential analysis or research. All this is also achieved with fewer people, not only making it easier to manage and more efficient but also reducing the overall risk of unnecessary exposure. Hikvision’s thermal portfolio has a number of options to help with fever screening. For example, a Turret/Bullet Camera with AI combined with iVMS 4200, a laptop and a bracket can be used as a quick solution that can be easily and quickly installed. For higher accuracy, a solution with a Blackbody calibrator gives an accuracy of ±0.3°C. There’s also a more mobile option, using a Handheld Camera that can connect to a smart phone or PC through wifi to a Hik-Thermal app. This also features a built-in speaker for audio alarm. There are also solutions that combine fever screening with access control, allowing lobbies to be monitored and, if necessary, people measuring above a certain skin-surface temperature refused entry until they are double-checked by alternative methods. It’s important to remember that Hikvision’s fever screening thermographic cameras are designed for the detection of skin-surface temperatures so as to achieve rapid preliminary screening in public areas. Actual core body temperatures should be further confirmed using clinical measurement devices. This is just one element of a complex infrastructure to overcome challenges in unsure times. It can also give managers and researchers useful information, collected in a safe manner. Hikvision is committed to developing technologies to empower vision for decision-makers and practitioners, and enhance safety and advance sustainable development around the world. Click here to find out more about Hikvision, or contact: Jade Wang Email: wangqi7@hikvision.com
Cell: +27 60 441 3111 Or Alex Penhaligon Email: Penhaligon@hikvision.com
Mobile: +27 72 496 8570  This article was published in partnership with Hikvision.