The Discovery Health Medical Scheme is offering ‘isolation hotels’ to help members infected with the coronavirus to recover in solitude. The scheme said that most people with Covid-19 are expected to experience mild illness and can recover at home. However, because Covid-19 is highly contagious, complete isolation is necessary to avoid putting family members at risk of contracting the disease, it said. “To give members diagnosed with Covid-19 the option of isolating away from home, Discovery has partnered with hotel providers to create specifically managed isolation facilities. “The first hotel group offering this service is The Capital Hotels and Apartments. This benefit assists members of Discovery Medical Health Scheme (DHMS) who have Covid-19 to self-isolate in one of these dedicated isolation facilities.” Discovery said that members will get a significantly reduced rate of about 60% off the daily rate when staying at these hotels as an alternative to home-based isolation. Members will also have access to tailored medical support including nursing care, supportive over-the-counter medicine and online doctor consultations, as required, it said. “Discovery Health Medical Scheme will make 24-hour nursing care available at the hotel,” it said. “Nurses are registered with Discovery Home Care and will provide telephonic consultation and supportive over-the-counter medicine when needed. “While this option is mainly for someone with mild to no symptoms of Covid-19, nurses will also make referrals for online doctor consultations or medical transport to nearby hospitals. “The scheme will fund online doctor consultations and medicine from day-to-day benefits where available and the DHMS WHO Global Outbreak Benefit as specified on the benefit letter.” Below the group outlined how members will qualify to stay in one of these hotels. Discovery said that members can access this benefit while waiting for their Covid-19 test results (two days) or after a confirmed diagnosis of Covid-19. When you have been diagnosed with Covid-19 (positive test results) You will receive a letter that gives details of your cover from the DHMS WHO Global Outbreak Benefit. If you have not received the benefit letter, you can phone Discovery Health Medical Scheme on 0860 99 88 77 to confirm the COVID-19 diagnosis and to send the letter confirming your cover from the DHMS WHO Global Outbreak Benefit. Phone the hotel to confirm their rates and to book. Quote the authorisation number you received from the Scheme. Present the authorisation letter (print or electronic) when you check in and pay the reduced rate directly to the hotel for the period that you will be staying in isolation. When you are waiting for Covid-19 test results If your doctor suspects that you have COVID-19 and you are waiting for test results, you are eligible for this reduced rate at one of the hotels for two days. Phone Discovery Health Medical Scheme on 0860 99 88 77 to get an authorisation number for the two-day stay at the hotel.
Phone the hotel to confirm their rates and to book. Quote the authorisation number you received from the Scheme.
Present the authorisation number when you check in and pay the reduced rate directly to the hotel. You will be required to pay for 14 days in advance during check-in. “When you get a negative test result for Covid-19, the reduced rate will no longer apply and you will receive a refund of the payment you made for the additional days,” said Discovery. “With a test result confirming that you have Covid-19, the authorisation for isolation at the hotel will be extended as part of the DHMS WHO Global Outbreak Benefit.” Read: South African medical aids asked to give members a 3 month premium holiday – and cover coronavirus tests 