Openserve has announced that its fibre and DSL customers will see upgraded data speeds for a 3-month period, effective 1 May 2020. The group noted that the speed upgrades come after Covid-19 has forced communities, businesses and governments to embrace the centrality of technological advancements to connect, communicate, and conduct business remotely. “In light of the extraordinary circumstances the nation is currently facing, Openserve is taking extreme measures to not only protect the safety of our staff and clients but to ensure that we do everything in our power to keep the nation connected during the national lockdown period and beyond. Virtual connections have never been more important,” said Openserve chief executive officer Althon Beukes. He added that Openserve has recently introduced solutions and product incentives to the market that would enable reduced data pricing and improved access, allowing their clients to simplify their data product offerings to the end customer. “In addition to these earlier contributions, we are pleased to announce an increase in speed on our Openserve Fibre Connect and Openserve Copper Connect products, for a period of 3 months, from May 2020 to July 2020,” he said. Since the outbreak, a number of South African network providers and ISPs have started to offer upgraded data speeds. In response to these market changes, Beukes said that Openserve has taken the necessary steps to ensure ISPs are not negatively impacted, offering double the speeds to qualifying FTTH and DSL customers from May until July. The speed upgrades will include: Openserve fibre connect speed upgrades 10Mbps,20Mbps and 40Mbps speeds will be upgraded to 20Mbps,40Mbps and 100Mbps respectively;
Existing 100Mbps and 200Mbps will remain unchanged. Openserve copper connect speed upgrades Qualifying 1Mbps,2Mbps, 4Mbps and 8Mbps will be upgraded to 10Mbps subject to network and distance limitations;
Services unable to achieve 10Mbps will be excluded from the upgrade;
Existing 10Mbps, 20Mbps and 40Mbps will remain unchanged. Read: Wits University is giving students 30GB of free data for the lockdown 