Ensuring you have a solid Internet connection from a reliable service provider is just the first step to staying connected while working remotely. Another key component is creating a home network setup that is capable of supporting all the devices in your household to best use the high-speed broadband connectivity. At the core of this setup is your router, which is the gateway between your devices and the Internet. Click here to view the wide range of ASUS wireless routers and get lightning-fast connectivity today. As networks have to support an increase in Internet-enabled devices, with more personal wearables and smart home IoT gadgets going online, running your entire network over a decade-old router is not recommended. ASUS routers provide the latest in network technology to speed up your home connectivity and keep your productivity at peak levels. Routers like the RT-AX56U, RT-AX58U and RT-AX92U offer advanced features that will keep your Wi-Fi network performing optimally even with high demand. The latest standard of Wi-Fi, 802.11ax (Wi-Fi 6), leverages a combination of various network technologies to deliver better speed and capacity in traffic-dense environments. The 802.11ac (Wi-Fi 5) generation of routers only allows for the handling of one device at a time per network channel. Orthogonal frequency-division multiple access (OFDMA) and Multi-user Multiple-input Multiple-output (MU-MIMO) technologies make Wi-Fi 6 capable of up to four times the network capacity and efficiency of Wi-Fi 5. OFDMA divides channels into smaller sub-channels, allowing signals from multiple devices to be bundled together and transmitted simultaneously. These sub-channels also help increase overall coverage in your home, as their smaller bandwidth allows data transfer to travel up to 80% further. ASUS dual and tri-band routers can use multiple frequency bands and larger bandwidth channels to send and receive signals from devices. Combining this with 1,024 Quadrature Amplitude Modulation (QAM) delivers dramatically  faster wireless connections. The 2×2 dual-band RT-AX56U can reach a total networking speed of up to 1,800Mbps – 574Mbps on the 2.4Ghz band and 1,201Mbps on the 5GHz band – for 1.5 times the speed of Wi-Fi 5 dual-band routers. The 2×2 dual-band RT-AX58U takes this total network speed up to 3,000Mbps – 2.5 times faster than standard 2×2 dual-band routers. The 4×4 tri-band RT-AX92U is geared for the future and can provide up to 4,804Mbps on the 5GHz-2 band, which is used by the latest Wi-Fi 6 devices. In addition to providing improved coverage, more capacity and better speeds, these ASUS routers feature seamless connectivity to other compatible routers that support ASUS’s proprietary technology – AiMesh. This allows them to communicate with each other and track signal strength to devices in order to switch sources if necessary. Ethernet backhaul support allows you to connect these routers to each other via a wired connection, allowing for even more stable and reliable communication. Adequate cybersecurity measures are essential to protecting your devices and personal data from Internet threats. All of these ASUS routers come with lifetime free AIProtection Pro, powered by Trend Micro. This provides automatic, regularly updated security signatures to protect your devices. It further includes parental controls, allowing you to block specific websites and mobile app types on your network. Whether you require a reliable Wi-Fi network to keep your business running remotely, connect your smart home, or provide the best low-latency gaming experience, ASUS offers the router you need. The table below shows the specifications of the ASUS routers discussed above. Click here to view the wide range of ASUS wireless routers and get lightning-fast connectivity today.   This article was published in partnership with ASUS.