Uber says it has launched a delivery solution for South African retailers who can now deliver essential goods using the Uber app. Over the past few weeks, South African retailers and companies have been forced to significantly change the way they do business and serve customers as a result of Covid-19 pandemic. With the government introducing a 21-day National lockdown requiring people to stay at home, the demand for delivery of essential items is rapidly accelerating, Uber said in a statement on Wednesday (8 April). At the same time, demand from the business community for delivery services to help them keep up with consumer demand has dramatically increased, it noted. “In response, today Uber is offering a delivery service for businesses, leveraging its logistics technology and network of drivers to provide retailers and businesses with a seamless way to offer their customers delivery.” A delivery solution Uber said its delivery service aims to provide businesses of all sizes with a delivery solution for their customers. “From stores such as supermarkets, grocers and pharmacies, any business that needs to provide a delivery service to customers can easily sign-up and immediately start offering delivery in a matter of days. “Businesses can also manage multiple orders with one account and track their deliveries in real-time, ensuring customer deliveries arrive on time and intact,” it said. New income opportunities for driver-partners With over 13,000 registered and professional drivers with the necessary permits to travel during the lockdown, Uber said its delivery service is also providing much needed incremental income opportunities for drivers and retailers. “Using Uber’s technology and logistics expertise for deliveries not only unlocks new income opportunities for drivers, but importantly allows businesses to continue serving communities safely and reliably across South Africa, at a time when many are unable to leave their homes,” said Alon Lits, GM of Uber Sub Saharan Africa. Read: Uber Eats is now delivering essentials during South Africa’s lockdown – how much it costs to order 