Health minister Dr Zweli Mkhize has confirmed that there are now 4,793 positive Covid-19 cases in South Africa. This is up from the 4,546 Covid-19 cases announced on Sunday by the minister, meaning a rise of 247 cases over the past 24 hours. Mkhize also reported that the number of deaths from the coronavirus now stands at 90, up from the 87 deaths reported on Sunday. Two of the reported additional deaths were from the Western Cape. The third additional death was reported in KZN. All three patient had underlying co-morbities. A total of 178,470 tests have been conducted so far, 9,827 in the last 24 hours. Globally, coronavirus cases pushed through 3 million infected, with deaths at around 208,000, and 888,000 recoveries. The data shows 1,916,429 active cases, with 57,546 deemed to be serious/critical. UK prime minister Boris Johnson urged the British people not to let up on the social distancing measures that he said were bringing coronavirus under control, warning that to do so would risk a “second spike” of infection that would do even more damage, Bloomberg reported. Meanwhile, the United Nations’ top human rights official warned that emergency measures invoked used to enforce lockdowns during the coronavirus pandemic can’t be used to abuse detainees. Locking up curfew breakers who were simply looking for food in already overcrowded prisons is just one example, Michelle Bachelet, the high commissioner for Human Rights, said Monday in a statement, as reported by Bloomberg. Reports of police enforcing lockdowns with excessive and at times lethal force are “deeply worrying cases where governments appear to be using Covid-19 as a cover for human rights violations, further restricting fundamental freedoms and civic space, and undermining the rule of law,” said Bachelet. Footage from India, South Africa and the Philippines of authorities beating, kicking and keeping people in dog cages have emerged since countries started to the restrict travel in March. While many of the abuses have been recorded in poorer countries with mixed human-rights records, people are also growing more angry and impatient in the US and Europe with less extreme aspects of the lockdown. Cuban health professionals in SA South Africa asked China for additional doctors to assist the country in its fight against the coronavirus, health minister Dr Zweli Mkhize said. “It should not be difficult to also get additional foreign-trained doctors through for jobs and volunteer openings, if they are registered in South Africa,” Mkhize said on video conference with the country’s parliamentary health committees on Monday, as reported by Bloomberg. It also reported that 217 Cuban health workers arrived in South Africa, with some medical supplies being sent back to Cuba in the plane that the doctors traveled in.  The group consists of the following: Experts in the fields of epidemiology, biostatistics, and public health;
Family physicians to guide interventions through door-to-door testing and to assist local health workers in health promotion and disease surveillance at the community level;
Healthcare technology engineers to assist in maintaining the inventory, deployment and repair of aged medical equipment; and
Experts to provide technical assistance working with local experts. In 2019, South Africa and Cuba celebrated 25 years of cordial, mutually beneficial diplomatic relations and constructive cooperation at both bilateral and multilateral levels. Read: South African workers are missing out on over a billion rand in Covid-19 relief funds 