Health minister Dr Zweli Mkhize has confirmed that there are now 4,361 positive Covid-19 cases in South Africa. This is up from the 4,220 Covid-19 cases announced on Friday by the minister, meaning a rise of 141 cases over the past 24-hours, with the country having seen nearly 600 infections in the prior 48-hour period. Mkhize also reported that the number of deaths from the coronavirus now stands at 86, up from the 79 deaths reported on Friday. The seven additional deaths included four people from the Eastern Cape, two from the Western Cape, and one soul from Limpopo. The minister said that 161,004 tests have been conducted to date. The Western Cape has the most cases of infections, with 1,514, followed by Gauteng, with 1,304 cases.  Globally, coronavirus cases has reached approximately 2.85 million infections, with around 198,000 deaths, and  812,000 recoveries. Catching Covid-19 once may not protect you from getting it again, according to the World Health Organisation, a finding that could jeopardize efforts to allow people to return to work after recovering from the virus, Bloomberg reported. “There is currently no evidence that people who have recovered from Covid-19 and have antibodies are protected from a second infection,” the United Nations agency said in an April 24 statement. The WHO guidance came after some governments suggested that people who have antibodies to the coronavirus could be issued an “immunity passport” or “risk-free certificate” that would allow them to travel or return to work, based on the assumption that they were safe from re-infection, according to the statement. People issued such a certificate could ignore public-health guidance, increasing the risk of the disease spreading further. South Africa’s level 4 lockdown restrictions Government has published a document with the full details of the country’s lockdown levels, as the country gets ready to enter level 4 from 1 May 2020. As announced by president Cyril Ramaphosa on Thursday evening (23 April), the country is moving towards a graded alert level system, to determine how strict the country’s lockdown restrictions will be as it continues to battle the coronavirus pandemic, while re-igniting the economy. To aid in this measured approach, the country will adopt a risk-adjusted strategy made up of five levels, that will determine the risk and infection rate nationally, and in each province, district and metropolitan area. The approach has been guided by scientists and experts, who have warned that a sudden end to the lockdown will lead to a massive increase in the number of infections, the president said. That document can be found here Read: These are the people that will be allowed to return to work from 1 May 