Competition for jobs in the UK is growing, according to jobs specialist, Glassdoor, which notes that January will see a 17% spike in job applications in the country. To help identify roles you might want to consider, Glassdoor has announced its annual report identifying the 25 Best Jobs in the UK for 2020. “The jobs market continues to diversify as new skills emerge and new technologies change the world of work,” said Amanda Stansell, Glassdoor senior economic research analyst. “As we enter a new decade for job seekers, the 25 Best Jobs in the UK for 2020 aims to highlight roles that are in demand, offer desirable salaries and also give workers job satisfaction.” The Glassdoor Job Score is determined using three key factors: Salary: Earning potential based on the median base salary reported on Glassdoor over the past year.
Job Openings: The number of UK open job openings on Glassdoor as of 18/12/19.
Job Satisfaction: The overall job satisfaction rating (on a scale of 1.0= bad job to 5.0= best job) reported by actual employees working in these roles on Glassdoor over the past year. Enterprise Architect takes the top spot with a Job Score of 4.62, the first time a tech role has topped the list. Product Manager and Operations Manager complete the top three, demonstrating opportunities for those with diverse skills and project management experience, Glassdoor said. Interest from South Africa Data from executive recruitment specialists Jack Hammer  found that a high number of skilled executives are willing to leave South Africa for greener pastures. Jack Hammer noted that in 2019, 79% of respondents said they would consider moving abroad, compared to 82% last year, and 76% in 2017, which saw a massive jump from 29% in 2016. Numerous data points indicate that the UK is one of the countries South Africans target when looking to relocate abroad, most notably because it is English speaking, it has a strong currency, and offers strong career prospects. Read: 50 of the most common questions you should be prepared to answer at your next job interview 