The Department of Basic Education will release the class of 2019’s National Senior Certificate matric results on 7 January 2019, with individual learner results available on the morning of 8 January. Umalusi, the council for quality assurance in general and further education and training, has officially approved the results with no systemic irregularities reported. The class of 2019 was the sixth Grade 12 cohort to write final examinations under the Curriculum Assessment Policy Statements (CAPS). Furthermore, the class of 2019 entered Grade 1 in 2008 when the NSC was written for the first time in Grade 12. It was also the second cohort to write the newly introduced technical and technology subjects as well as South African Sign Language Home Language. How to get your results Learners can access their results (or register to receive them) in the following ways: Learners can obtain their results directly from the schools or learning facilities at which the exams were written. These results may only be available after 12h00 on the day. Learners can access their results directly by logging onto the Department of Basic Education’s website here. Alternatively, students who took the IEB examinations can access their results from the IEB website here A number of online news websites will publish the results – including News24’s Matric Results page. Download the MatricsMate App for free from Google Play and Apple App Stores. SMS your exam number to the SABC’s 45856. The system verifies the exam number; your exam number must be correct in order to be accepted. Learners will be charged R1-50 per SMS, free SMSes do not apply. Dial *120*45856# enter exam number to register. You will be charged R1-50 per minute and the results will be sent to your phone as soon as they are available. For those wanting to use the Department of Education’s services, learners can send their ID number and exam number via SMS to 35658 or use the USSD service by dialling *120*35658# Read: 4 tables and graphs you should see ahead of South Africa’s matric results 