The ANC’s national executive committee has published its ‘January 8th’ statement for 2020, outlining its plans and hopes for the country in the coming year. The statement touches on a number of issues including land expropriation without compensation and the country’s struggling state-owned enterprises. BusinessTech looked at these points in more detail below. Land expropriation without compensation The ANC said that it is proceeding with the implementation of an ‘accelerated land reform programme’ – including expropriation without compensation. “The return of the land will happen and it will be done in a manner that promotes economic growth and sustains food security,” it said. “Land reform needs to be closely tied to integrated spatial development to ensure that both rural and urban dwellers live in sustainable human settlements located close to economic opportunities and social infrastructure.” SAA and other state-owned enterprises The ANC noted that several key state-owned enterprises (SOEs) are facing great difficulties and that this has had ‘a severe impact on broader economic growth and transformation’. “The crisis at Eskom has contributed to load shedding over the last year, further subduing economic activity. Eskom’s new leadership team will need to address the entity’s financial, operational, structural and human resource challenges. “The fact that South African Airways has been put under business rescue to enable it to be restructured and returned to financial sustainability is a demonstration both of the depth of the crisis and the determination of our government to decisively address it.” Reserve Bank The ANC said that it reaffirms the role, mandate and independence of the Reserve Bank and will undertake the process towards full public ownership of the Bank in a manner and according to a timeframe that is prudent and affordable and that does not benefit private shareholder speculators. It said that it also welcomes new legislation that will allow for the establishment of a state bank that will improve access for all South Africans to affordable financial services. Clamping down on corruption The ANC said it will become more vigilant in screening its candidates and ensure that these members meet the highest standards of ethics, morality and service to the people. “Once elected, the movement must ensure that ANC public representatives serve the people with distinction. Where this does not happen, there must be consequences – and there will be consequences,” it said. “Already steps have been taken to disrupt networks of corruption in local government, and we are determined that no public servant or elected official should get away with stealing from the poor.” Carbon emissions and water shortages The ANC said that South Africa needs to take decisive measures to reduce its carbon footprint, inline with international commitments, in a manner that is sustainable and ensures a just transition for workers and communities that may be affected by a shift to a lower-carbon economy. “We similarly need to act decisively to protect our scarce water resources, ensure that all have equitable access and respond to the devastating effects of successive droughts,” it said. “Such action is essential to ensure the development of our economy and the realisation of the constitutional right of all South Africans to sufficient food and water.” NHI The ANC said that it will continue to push for the establishment of the National Health Insurance, which it says will fundamentally transform health care in South Africa. “By establishing a single national health insurance fund to ensure all South Africans receive the necessary treatment and care regardless of ability to pay, the NHI will reduce the huge inequalities and inefficiencies in our health system,” it said. Schools The ANC said it will speed up the implementation of the three-stream curriculum model of basic education to provide three educational streams – academic, technical-vocational and technical-occupational. This model will make it easier for learners to make a transition from school to colleges and universities and to be educated and trained in a way that meets the skills and labour demands of the country’s economy, it said. Read: R470,000 for serviettes – and other things South African taxpayers are paying for at state funerals 