Overstrand Municipality in the Western Cape has alerted residents to its by-laws which require all dogs to be registered – with owners being taxed for each dog they own. The by-law, Relating to the Keeping of Dogs and Cats requires all owners of dogs to have their dog (or dogs) registered and pay an annual tax for them. The provision does not apply to cats, however. The annual tax amounts to R86 per dog, with certain exclusions for the elderly or indigent. Aside from registration and taxes, pet owners also face other strict regulations in the municipality. Pet owners may not keep a dog (or dogs) that barks, or whimpers or howls “to such an extent that it causes an unreasonable disturbance or nuisance to other people in the neighbourhood”, and are limited to only having two dogs and three cats on any property. This does not apply to premises which are used as veterinary clinics and/or veterinary hospitals or for the training of guide dogs for the blind or dog breeders who have written consent of the council to keep more than two dogs on any erf. These provisions are also not applicable where dogs are kept for security services/training purposes, it said. Cats are subject to the same public nuisance laws, but also carry sterilisation requirements – ie, a cat over six months old cannot be kept unless it has been sterilised, and owners are in possession of veterinary certificate stating as such. The by-laws were first drafted in 2008, with the penalty for contravening the law being a R100 fine per violation – but they were only formally adopted in 2016. The municipality is run by the DA, and covers a population of over 80,000 people, including wards such as Hermanus, Sandbaai, Kleinmond and others. The municipality is also set to trial dog beach zones in 2020. Designated ‘dog zones’ will be introduced on beaches in Hermanus, Gansbaai and Kleinmond for a trial period of six months. “Not everyone likes dogs or wants to deal with dogs on a day out at the beach, especially when they have small children with them. “Other than a fear of dogs there is also the possibility of an overly excited dog running or jumping on kids or peeing on sandcastles, which do not make for very happy children,” the municipality said by way of rationale. “Moreover, beach runners may prefer a beach without dogs as dogs with a high prey/chase drive may chase/attack a runner,” it said. It noted that many people also enjoy dogs on beaches. “Zoning will help people, dogs and our shorebirds live their best lives,” it said. Read: Shock tax hike coming for South Africans in April, economists warn 