Eskom has announced that stage 2 load shedding will continue from 09:00 today and throughout the weekend. In a statement on Friday (31 January), the embattled power utility said that the blackouts will only stop at 06h00 on Monday morning (3 February). Eskom said the power cuts were due to a shortage of capacity and the depletion of emergency resources which were used to supplement supply over the last couple of days. “Unplanned outages were at 12,722MW as at 05h30 this morning. We are monitoring the system closely and we will continue to give periodic updates on the status of the power system as things may change at short notice.”  Load shedding last hit in the first weeks of January, with the power utility managed to avoid load shedding since then – despite high levels of unplanned outages, sitting around 13,000MW – due to lower demand and adequate reserves. According to experts, load shedding is expected to continue for the next two to three years at the very least, as Eskom moves to build new capacity and government clears the way for independent producers to get on the grid. However, this would require everything to go right in this regard – and doubts linger that government, state companies and the private sector will be able to work together. Eskom CEO Andre De Ruyter is expected to present a ‘state of the system’ briefing on Friday that may shed more light on how he’s going to turn things around. Load shedding schedules Customers can find their various load shedding schedules on their local metro or municipal websites, where applicable, or from Eskom directly. For those living in South Africa’s major metros, here is where you can check to see when you will be hit: City of Johannesburg
City of Ekurhuleni 
City of Tshwane 
City of Cape Town (PDF)
Nelson Mandela Bay
eThekwini
Manguang
Buffalo City For access to other load shedding schedules, Eskom has made them available on loadshedding.eskom.co.za. Smartphone users can also download the app EskomSePush to receive push notifications when load shedding is implemented, as well as the times the area you are in will be off. Read: Eskom to look at building pebble-bed nuclear plants 