The Department of Basic Education will release the national matric results for the class of 2019 on 7 January 2020. Many of these students will be aiming to secure a bachelor’s pass to help secure a place in one of the country’s top universities and study for a higher certificate, diploma or bachelor’s degree. However, it is also possible for students to earn a ‘diploma’ and ‘certificate’ pass which will also allow them to study further. To help explain the differences between these different passes, the Western Cape Department of Education has published a guide outlining the differences between the certificates and how students may qualify for them. Bachelor’s pass A bachelor’s pass means you can apply for a degree course at a university or university of technology and can study for a higher certificate, diploma or bachelor’s degree. To achieve a bachelor’s pass, you must: Pass 6 of the 7 subjects offered;
Of which four Subjects must be at least a 50% (level 4) achievement;
Including Home Language 40% Compulsory Pass /excluding Life Orientation;
30% Pass in the Language of Learning and Teaching (LOLT);
The Department of Basic Education has revoked the list of designated subjects with effect from September 2018;
The minimum admission requirements for a Bachelor’s degree programme remain the same, namely, a NSC with a minimum of 30% in the language of learning and teaching of the Higher Education Institution (HEI), coupled with an achievements rating of 4 (50-59%) or better in any four (4) NSC subject except Life Orientation. It should be noted that even if a student has achieved a bachelor’s pass, they do not automatically qualify for a university position. Diploma pass A diploma pass requires 40% in four higher credit subjects, 30% in three lower credit subjects, and you may fail one subject. With this pass, you can enrol for a bridging course at a Technical Vocational Education and Training (TVET) college or a diploma course at a university of technology. To receive a diploma pass, a student must: Pass 6 of the 7 subjects offered;
Of which 4 Subjects must be at least a 40% (level 3) achievement;
Subjects include Home Language at 40% Compulsory Pass /excluding Life Orientation;
30% Pass in Language of Learning and Teaching (LOLT). Certificate pass A certificate pass requires a 40% pass in your home language, 2 subjects above 40%, 4 subjects above 30% and you may fail 1 subject. This pass allows you to study for a higher certificate. Unsuccessful students It is possible for some unsuccessful students to rewrite a paper through a  supplementary exam. You qualify to rewrite if you’ve failed 2 or more subjects. Only candidates who were registered for and, who wrote the November 2019 NSC examination, can apply to write a supplementary exam. 2019 Grade 12 learners can register to write the examination if: They failed to meet the requirements in the November examination;
They passed but seek to improve their performance; or
They were absent from the writing of one or more question papers due to ill-health or other unforeseen circumstances;
The closing date for NSC May/June 2020 supplementary examination applications is 31 January 2020. Read: Here’s a back to school financial checklist for the new year 