Thousands of matric students would, this past week, have received the final results of their National Senior Certificate (NSC) examinations. It’s a crucial time in these learners’ lives as a matric certificate has become a basic requirement for getting a job in South Africa while also being the gateway to further education, says Jackie Carroll, chief executive officer of Media Works, an adult education and training (AET) provider. But if you are one of those learners who are either unhappy with the symbols you’ve attained or if you’ve even failed matric, don’t lose hope. There are steps you can take to improve your situation, she says. Here are a few scenarios and options at hand. You’ve passed matric but you haven’t achieved your desired results Your first option in this instance would be to apply for a remark if you think that you did better than what your final results indicate. You can apply for a remark either at your school or district education office in your province. The closing date for remark applications is 22 January 2020 and you can find out more about this process by visiting the Department of Basic Education’s website. Your second option, in this case, would be to register for supplementary exams and take another opportunity at improving your symbols. The Department of Education has set down May/June 2020 as a period where candidates can improve their results or complete outstanding results via supplementary exams. The closing date for applications for supplementary exams is 31 January 2020. You’ve failed matric and want a second chance The Department of Education (DoE) also offers a programme called ‘Second Chance’, which provides learners with free support. The Second Chance programme enables learners to write supplementary exams for a maximum of two subjects in order to meet the pass requirements of the NSC examinations. These exams are written after learners have received a total of 12 hours of face-to-face classes to give them the best chance of passing. When it comes to supplementary exams, you cannot return to your school to re-attend classes. Instead, you’ll have the option of attending classes at a community college or a private learning institution. “Whether you’re undergoing the Second Chance programme or if you’re simply doing a rewrite to improve your marks, you can also prepare for your supplementary exams by using online courses from Matric Works,” Carroll said. Matric Works provides all the information required to pass matric, using the same curriculum as a school would use, but in an e-learning format that has achieved an exceptional pass rate among learners of all ages. Going the adult route Lastly, if you’re over the age of 21 and you don’t have a matric, you still have the option of attaining your Amended Senior Certificate (ASC). An ASC has just slight differences to that of an NSC. For example, with an ASC your final mark is determined by your exam results only while you don’t do unexaminable subjects such as Life Orientation, Carroll said. “But in every respect, the ASC is a matric qualification that is recognised by employers. It can also grant you entry to tertiary education as long as you have the necessary qualifying symbols.” There are several ways of studying towards your ASC, including going to adult community colleges or via private learning institutions. But, once again, you can also obtain your ASC via Matric Works where you can sign-up for Grade 12 subjects ranging from English to Mathematics and Business Studies. These courses are designed with the adult learner in mind and offer flexibility when it comes to learning at one’s own pace, in one’s own time, Carroll said. “Whichever route you decide to go and whichever situation you are in, there are opportunities available to help you achieve your matric.” Read: Matric class of 2019 will struggle to find jobs 