The University of the Witwatersrand has published early registration statistics for first-year students in 2020. The university said that it has received 68,752 applications for first-year studies but was only able to accommodate a total of 4,900 applicants. Engineering (across all eight branches) attracted the highest number of applicants with approximately 19,000 applications. This was followed by 17,036 applicants for a Bachelor of Science degree. The university said that there were also 13,113 applicants for Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery, but noted that it would only be able to accommodate 220 spaces for first-year medicine. “The ranking and the reputation of the University’s academic programmes in these areas are a contributing factor. Wits has highly valued Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) programmes,” it said. “Applications for undergraduate studies closed on 2 October 2019, however, all courses in the Faculty of Health Sciences closed on 30 June 2019. Architecture, audiology, speech pathology, and film and television also closed on 30 June 2019.” The university said that it will not accept late applications. “Currently, provisional offers are being made to consistent top academic performers and final offers will be made to applicants once the final matric examination results are released by the relevant authorities.” Accommodation The university said that the number of beds available in university-owned and managed residences for 2020 is 6,506. “The university is aiming to accommodate at least 2,500 first-year students at Wits residences in the year 2020. The plan is to have 50% of all residence spaces occupied by first-year students in the 2021 academic year and beyond.” Wits added that it looking to increase the number of first-year students staying at its residence to ensure a smooth transition from high school to university. “Research shows that first year students have a higher success rate if they reside at a university-owned/managed residence when starting university. “This is due to the additional support and programmes provided at residences, which create a conducive academic and social environment for success at university,” it said. Read: Matric class of 2019 will struggle to find jobs 