The Western Cape government has published a new outline of the requirements for joining the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) in 2020. The outline states that one of the most common ways to currently enter the SANDF is through the Military Skills Development System (MSDS). The Military Skills Development System (MSDS) is a two-year voluntary service system that allows young South African citizens to serve in uniform. Successful MSDS candidates will receive basic military training, specific mustering and functional training in the first year and be utilised or deployed internally or externally in the second year of the MSDS. After the two years, you will either continue as part of the reserve force or receive a contract offer to join the regular force. Requirements To qualify for the MSDS programme, you have to meet the following requirements: Be a South African citizen only. (No dual citizenship);
Grade 12 Applicants must be between the ages of 18 – 22 years;
Graduates and/or other Tertiary Qualification up to the age of 26 years;
Completed Grade 12 with (Average of 50% or level 4) (Mathematics and Science will be advantageous);
Admission Point Score (APS) of 17 excluded Life Orientation (LO);
Leadership potential;
Not to be area bound;
Have no criminal record or pending cases;
Comply with medical fitness requirements for the appointment (Minimum height Females 148cm, Males 155cm and minimum weight Females 48kg, For males the minimum weight is 52kg (Within average height/weight ratio)). Training In the first two years of voluntary service, you can expect to receive the following training. First-year of MSDS Basic military training and functional training;
Corps specific training;
Participation in practical military exercises;
Combat ready training exercises;
Selection of junior leaders. Second-year of MSDS Junior leaders (officers) are receiving leader group corps training;
Undergo young officers formative training;
Selection of Officers to study at the military academy;
Focus on utilisation and deployment of MSDS troops. Military Skills Development System members will receive wages for the duration of their two-year full-time training and utilisation. However, the SANDF has historically been hesitant about providing exact salary information regarding the MSDS programme due to the high number of scams targeting prospective trainees. Further information can be obtained through the SANDF’s website here and the army’s website here. Read: Here’s where and when you are most likely to be hijacked in South Africa 