The Council for Quality Assurance in General and Further Education and Training, Umalusi, has approved the release of the 2019 national examinations results. In a statement on Friday (3 January), the body said that its quality assurance process focused on the following aspects: The external moderation of question papers for all subjects/learning areas/instructional offerings across all qualifications and assessment bodies;
Verification of a sample of site-based assessment (SBA) marks;
Monitoring of the assessment bodies’ state of readiness to conduct and manage the 2019 national examinations;
Monitoring the conduct of examinations;
Monitoring and verification of marking;
Standardisation of results. “The class of 2019 was the sixth Grade 12 cohort to write final examinations under the Curriculum Assessment Policy Statements (CAPS),” Umalusi said. “Furthermore, the class of 2019 entered Grade 1 in 2008 when the NSC was written for the first time in Grade 12. It was also the second cohort to write the newly introduced technical and technology subjects as well as South African Sign Language Home Language.” While the body did not give an indication of the overall results, it said that it was ‘pleased’  with the improvement in learner performance in subjects such as Geography, Physical Science and Mathematical Literacy. “This is an indication of a maturing system in which expectations regarding curriculum and assessment standards are becoming more and more entrenched in the system,” it said. Irregularities Umalusi said that the 2019 national examinations went smoothly without any systemic irregularities. Systemic irregularities are exam irregularities/malpractices that compromise the integrity of examinations on a large scale, for example, paper leakages that have the potential to affect an entire subject in a circuit, district, province or nationwide. “However, each academic year seems to bring a new set of challenges in the conduct and administration of the NSC examinations,” Umalusi said. Therefore, it said that the  following incidents are worth mentioning: On 16 and 17 October 2019, the writing of the DBE practical examinations of Computer Applications Technology and Information Technology in some parts of the country was affected by load shedding. For Information Technology almost 1000 candidates were impacted. However, arrangements were made for the affected learners to write back-up papers on 29 November 2019 in both subjects. Protest action in the North-West province threatened the conduct of the examinations in parts of the province. However, the DBE was able to make alternative arrangements timeously. Read: South Africans with matric and bachelor’s degrees: 1994 vs 2019 