Specialist recruitment firm Michael Page has published its latest salary guide, showing what skilled professionals in 185 different jobs in South Africa can expect to earn in 2020. “Overall, we have seen a decline in demand across most industries within South Africa, with certain industries feeling the impact more than others. Companies are looking for ways to increase output and productivity, while at the same time cutting costs,” the group said. “Therefore, automation, robotics, artificial intelligence, digital and in broader terms, technology is playing a bigger role in achieving the above mentioned goals.” South Africa is also facing a brain drain of highly skilled labour who are opting to emigrate, the group noted, saying that this is creating a talent gap in the market, further contributing to the challenges of investing in the economy. According to Michael Page’s survey data, 46% of job seekers in South Africa are not optimistic about the local job market and economy – though most (62%) believe things will improve in the next six months. One of the top reasons people are looking for a new job is because their current role isn’t offering opportunities for further development. “Job seekers wanting their responsibilities to broaden,as well as seeking a better salary package, are other reasons motivating their job search,” the group said. Professional salaries in South Africa The group’s data for its salary benchmark is derived from the group’s proprietary database, capturing job advertisements and placements throughout 2019. It is also supplemented with data and insights from other studies such as quarterly job market surveys, and insights from interactions with clients and candidates. The tables below outline the salary ranges and averages for South African professionals across all sectors. You can download the full report here. The averages represent annual salaries, in thousands of rands (R’000). Sectors marked with a * show the salary ranges for large companies. Finance and Accounting* Information Technology* Engineering and Manufacturing* Procurement* Human Resources Legal Supply Chain and Logistics* Sales and Marketing (Consumer) Sales and Marketing (B2B) Read: More than 27,000 South African businesses will have to show the salary gaps between top and bottom earners 