The United Kingdom’s Home Office has published its updated occupation list, highlighting the jobs which are currently facing a shortage and are in demand in England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland. Applications for the UK’s new skilled worker visa opened on 1 December, with the aim of attracting ‘the brightest and the best from around the world’ to apply to work in the UK from 1 January 2021. Under the points-based immigration system, points will be awarded for a job offer at the appropriate skill level, knowledge of English and being paid a minimum salary. Skilled worker visas will be awarded to those who gain enough points. “The new immigration rules will ensure that businesses can recruit the most highly qualified from across the globe to drive the economy forwards and keep the UK at the frontier of innovation,” the Home Office said. “It will also encourage employers to focus on training and investing in the UK workforce, driving productivity and improving opportunities for individuals, especially those impacted by coronavirus.” The full occupation list can be found here. According to migration experts Sable International, the UK’s new system will bring both EU and non-EU nationals under a singular immigration regime and UK employers will need to assess their existing recruitment practices, right to work processes, and address their sponsor licence needs as they look at ongoing business requirements moving into 2021 and beyond. Under the new system, the Tier 2 (General) category will be replaced by the Skilled Worker category, said Darren Faife, managing director of Business immigration at Sable International. “The headline changes to the existing scheme will be the removal of the often burdensome and time-consuming Resident Labour Market Test, although a genuine vacancy must still exist, and the suspension of the monthly limit on eligible applicants. As a result, employers should experience much quicker end-to-end processing, saving as much as eight weeks in some cases.” Faife said that the minimum skills threshold will also be reduced from the current NQF Level 6 (graduate level), to NQF Level 3 (A-level standard), opening the scheme to a broader number of occupations. “To reflect the lower entry requirement, the minimum salary level has been reduced from £30,000 to £25,600 or the going rate for the job, whichever is higher.” Faife said that the English language requirement will, however, continue to apply. To qualify as a Skilled Worker, applicants must obtain a total of 70 points. A core 50 points will be earned from a job offer at a certain skill level from a licenced sponsor, with the applicant being able to show evidence of their English Language ability. An additional 20 points may be obtained via a “mix and match/ tradeable” process, largely dependent on the salary rate offered, but also encompassing roles that are recognised as being a shortage occupation and those jobs requiring a relevant PhD-level qualification. Read: Lockdown forced nearly half of small businesses in South Africa to close: study