Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma has published a new gazette which provides further clarity around South Africa’s new lockdown rules for the festive season. The gazette gives effect to an address made by president Cyril Ramaphosa on Monday evening (14 December), in which he announced new measures at both a national and district level for the country. It also adds to the existing rules which were published by Dlamini-Zuma in a gazette at the beginning of the week. The latest gazette provides further clarity on hotels and other venues as well as for the country’s wine farms. It also officially introduces a 21h00 ‘closing time’ for many businesses in South Africa’s hotspot regions in the Eastern Cape and Western Cape. Gatherings Hotels, lodges, bed and breakfasts, timeshare facilities, resorts and guest houses are allowed full capacity of the available rooms for accommodation, with patrons observing a distance of at least one and a half metres from each other when in common spaces. Conferencing, dining, entertainment and bar facilities are subject to a limitation of a maximum of 100 persons or less in case of an indoor gathering and 250 persons or less in case of an outdoor gathering. In the earlier gazette published on Monday, government confirmed that the following places or events are limited to 100 persons or less in case of an indoor gathering and 250 persons or less in case of an outdoor gathering, Social events;
Political events and traditional council meetings;
Conferences and meetings;
Concerts and live performances;
Cinemas and theatres. If the venue is too small to hold 100 persons observing a distance of at least one and a half metres from each other, then not more than 50% of the capacity of the venue can be used. Alcohol Registered wineries and wine farms can continue to operate, offering tastings and selling wine to the public for off-site consumption, subject to strict adherence to the curfew and adherence to social distancing measures and health protocols. In the gazette published on Monday, government indicated that the sale of liquor by licensed premises for off-site consumption is only permitted from 10h00 to 18h00, from Mondays to Thursdays – excluding Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays. Liquor can be sold by licensed premises for on-site consumption, subject to strict adherence to the curfew. The consumption of liquor in public places, except in licensed on-site consumption premises, is not permitted. Hotspots In line with the 22h00 – 04h00 curfew for South Africa’s hotspot areas, the new directive also introduces a new 21h00 closing time for certain establishments to allow staff and members of the public to return home in time. In hotspot areas, closing time has been set at 21h00 for the following establishments, whether indoors or out: Faith-based institutions;
Venues where social events are hosted;
Venues hosting concerts and five performances;
Cinemas;
Theatres;
Casinos;
Museums, galleries and archives;
Gyms, fitness centres and swimming pools;
Restaurants, bars, taverns, shebeens and similar establishments;
Venues hosting sport, arts and culture activities; and
Any other place where a gathering may take place. You can find the full list of lockdown rules here. Read: What happens when Covid-19 vaccines become available in South Africa?