The South African Revenue Service (SARS) says it has ‘noted with deep concern’ the alarming spread of Covid-19 infections because of a second wave that has enveloped South Africa Taking into account the transmission risk that Covid-19 poses, SARS said it has decided to put preventative restrictions in place. “We, therefore, wish to inform members of the public that all SARS offices will be closed from Thursday 24 December 2020 until Monday 4 January 2021,” it said. “This two-week period of the physical lockdown of offices is SARS’ contribution to curb any further possible spread of Covid-19 infections among taxpayers and our staff.” However, in line with SARS’s mandate to service all members of the public, the revenue collector said that all offices will operate remotely via our digital channels. Branches will also engage with taxpayers via the use of virtual meetings using Microsoft Teams, it said. “No member of the public will, unfortunately, be allowed at any SARS branch from 24 December 2020 to 4 January 2021.” As part of SARS’s commitment to all members of the public, it noted the following points: All existing branch appointments will be honoured; Branch appointments can only be made via the SARS website; All new bookings via the SARS site will be honoured via a virtual engagement (Microsoft Teams or a telephonic engagement); The SARS Contact Centre will continue to service any queries from members of the public; All South African borders manned by SARS customs officials will continue to operate during this lockdown period. Please note that strict social distance measures will apply and it will be compulsory for members of the public to wear masks when entering any SARS building or engaging with any customs officials. The sanitising of hands is also compulsory. No access will be allowed without complying with these protocols. “These measures are being untaken with the wellbeing of SARS employees and all South African citizens in mind and we appeal to each taxpayer to take this call to adherence very seriously. With the co-operation of each citizen, we will be able to overcome this pandemic. “We will review this decision and communicate in advance should we decide to extend this arrangement. We thank taxpayers for their cooperation and understanding as we navigate this challenging period. “We wish all citizens a joyful and safe festive period, and call on them to act responsibly during this difficult time.” Read: This is when South African workers are entitled to a 13th cheque