The Road Traffic Management Corporation (RTMC) says that it will be in full force over the December holiday period to ensure that South African motorists comply with traffic rules. The corporation said that traffic law enforcement officers have arrested more than 500 motorists for various traffic offences throughout the country since the launch of the festive season road safety campaign in Polokwane last week. The majority of the arrests (219) related to drunken driving followed by an execution of 189 outstanding warrants. Other offences include speeding and operating public transport vehicles without permits. A total of 128 roadblocks have been conducted so far during which, 71,328 vehicles have been stopped, 56,805 traffic fines issued, 312 vehicles discontinued, 525 vehicles impounded and 541 arrests made. Road safety education and awareness campaigns and law enforcement operations will be intensified this week as the country prepares for the year-end peak travel period, it said. “The Road Traffic Management Corporation (RTMC) advises all motorists to check if they have any outstanding traffic fines before embarking on their festive journeys. “Traffic officers are being deployed on all major routes and those found with outstanding traffic fines will not be allowed to proceed. “Traffic officers will also be deployed at various locations nationwide to deal with inconsiderate reckless and negligent driving, speeding, drunk driving, roadworthiness and overloading.” The RTMC said that that it also intensify operations at taxi ranks, malls and rest stops to further raise awareness among drivers, passengers and pedestrians about road safety, the RTMC will be conducting activations at taxi ranks, malls and rest stops. “The RTMC wishes all those travelling long distance to holiday destinations a safe journey ahead. Motorists are urged to travel the day to avoid collisions. Evidence shows that many fatal crashes occur at night when the level of reckless driving occurs.” Watch: Cars struggle to meet safety requirements in South African crash test