Huawei’s growth into a dominant global vendor has coincided with its partnership with leading South African ICT distributor Mustek. The partnership has had a major impact on the ICT industry in South Africa – not only by driving innovation, but also by changing the lives of many South Africans. Click here to learn more about Huawei training through Mustek. Key to the partnership between Huawei and Mustek is the shared entrepreneurial appetite – even as both companies are established in the South African ICT space. It is this innovation that has grown Huawei within the local market, as the global ICT powerhouse has been willing to take chances in order to improve its offerings, and Mustek has worked alongside them every step of the way. These chances are not just gambles, however; they are calculated moves that are made at the appropriate time to maximise their position in the market. For example, in 2018, Huawei became one of the first hyperscale cloud providers in South Africa – and this has enabled it to become a top cloud provider across the enterprise, public, and SME sectors. While Huawei has continually innovated in the local industry and become a dominant force as a result, its priority is providing the best products to customers. This means it places a heavy reliance on working with the right resellers and solution providers – and Mustek has been a key player here. One area where Mustek has proved particularly impactful is in skills development. Huawei and Mustek have focused on making learning skills practical, rational, and accelerated – particularly in terms of the cloud. Mustek has also acquired over 80 Huawei certifications of its own and is dedicated to helping other partners get these skills, too. Mustek assists partners learn skills across a variety of key Huawei fields, including: Interconnectivity
Collaboration
Automation
Big Data & Storage
Network & Cyber Security
Virtualization
Hyper-Availability
AI
IoT
Machine Learning
Cloud
Data Centres
Green Energy
Application Development These and other technologies are being integrated into organisations at a rapid rate, meaning the acquisition of relevant skills is crucial for those who will be working with these technologies. Mustek drives its skills development through its Mecer Inter-Ed (MIE) subsidiary, which is a Huawei Authorised Learning Partner. MIE helps South African organisations train, enable, and transform their capabilities across the Huawei ecosystem of channel partners and end customers, providing them with world-class training and certification solutions across these need-based segments: Career development – Early, mid-career, and channel partner enablement across three levels: associate, professional, and expert.
Ongoing IT management – Training that covers both the hardware and software components of Huawei ICT infrastructure and platform solutions.
Technology adoption – Sales and pre-sales training. “Mustek and Huawei have been through a lot together,” said Huawei product manager at Mustek, Donna Mostert. “We’ve helped build each other’s success, knowing that we are also contributing to the lasting success of the region. I don’t think you can just engineer that.” Click here to learn more about Mecer Inter-Ed. This article was published in partnership with Mustek.