Despite rumours of the demise of ransomware, it is still very much alive and kicking. A Sophos survey of 3 100 organisations found that 30% of cyberattack victims had been hit by ransomware. Additionally, and of concern, nine in 10 respondents said their organisation was running up to date cybersecurity protection at the time of the attack. “Most organisations have at least some form of IT security in place. So why are ransomware attacks slipping through the net?” asked Ross Anderson, Sophos Product Development Manager at Duxbury Networking. “Hacking is becoming easier while attackers are becoming more sophisticated in their approach and ‘Exploit as a Service’ (EaaS) programs that take advantage of vulnerabilities in existing software products are increasingly accessible.” “These kits make it simple for less tech-savvy criminals to initiate, complete, and benefit from a ransomware attack,” Anderson noted. Criminals use skillful social engineering to prompt users to run the ransomware’s installation routine. They try to trick users into activating the ransomware with emails that encourage the recipient to click on a link or open a file. In addition, producers of ransomware operate in a highly organised fashion. This includes providing a working decryption tool after the ransom has been paid, although this is by no means guaranteed. There are multiple ways that a ransomware attack starts. Common techniques include: Malicious emails
Poisoned websites redirecting you to exploit kits
Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) and other remote access holes. After initial exposure, attacks typically fall into two different categories: ‘Fire and forget’. These types of automated attacks target multiple organisations with the hope of securing a high quantity of smaller ransoms. A good example is WannaCry. Thousands of organisations were hit by WannaCry at the same time. These hackers use automated, ‘fire and forget’ techniques, where the attack is launched and spread to as many computers as possible. Due to the automation and number of attacks, the attacker is oblivious to the stages of the attack.
Targeted ransomware. This is a very manual attack, typically focuses on one victim at a time and often demands much higher ransom fees. The attackers gain access to the network and move laterally; identifying high-value systems in the process. Strains of this type of ransomware, overcome challenges as they arise, making them particularly deadly. Staying secure against ransomware is not just about having the latest security solutions. Good IT security practices, including regular training for employees, are essential components of every single security setup. Anderson suggests applying these 10 best security practices to mitigate the effects of ransomware: For more information contact Duxbury Networking, dial 011 351 9800, email info@duxnet.co.za, or visit www.duxbury.co.za. This article was published in partnership with Duxbury Networking.