Comair has restarted British Airways’ domestic services, providing a choice of more flights, more routes, a full-service offering, lounge offerings, frequent flyer benefits and a business class option. British Airways will serve all the domestic routes it did prior to lockdown – with the exception of Port Elizabeth-Durban, which will re-start early next year. Regional routes will also be re-introduced in the new year, Comair said. “We’re the only full-service airline operating wide-bodied aircraft and are able to offer a choice of economy (Traveller) and business class (Club), free checked baggage, meals and beverages, more comfortable seating and more legroom,” said Glenn Orsmond, Comair chief executive. “In addition to experiencing excellent onboard service, our customers are also able to join the Executive Club and earn Avios, which can be redeemed on all one world alliance partners. “Gold and Silver Executive Club members and customers flying in Club also have access to the SLOW lounges and the Special Services teams at the airports,” he said. Orsmond said that its SLOW lounges have re-opened in the domestic terminals at OR Tambo, Cape Town International and King Shaka International. Comair said that the other lounges will open as the schedule expands. Strict Covid-19 measures have been implemented in all the lounges. Kulula Comair-operated domestic airline Kulula resumed flights on 1 December after a months-long delay caused by the coronavirus lockdown and a business rescue process. To ensure a smooth transition to resuming operations, Comair will be operating a limited schedule, with limited aircraft during December 2020. The aircraft will gradually return to service from December 2020, with a seven-month ramp-up period until June 2021. Kulula said it will operate all domestic routes, with the exception of the Durban/Cape Town and Lanseria routes, which will be added as more aircraft become available. British Airways, operated by Comair, will open its domestic flights later in December. Comair’s resumption of flights will be headed up by a new chief executive after the current boss, Wrenelle Stander, resigned from her position with immediate effect on Monday. The airline group announced the appointment of Glenn Orsmond as its new chief executive officer, and the appointment of Kirsten King as chief financial officer. Read: Government looks at restaurants, alcohol and beaches to fight Covid-19 surge over December