President Cyril Ramaphosa has taken a hard stance on the current state of the ANC, and allegations of corruption that continue to dog the party. The party’s national executive committee (NEC) met over the weekend to discuss some of the key political issues facing the country, with the president noting that the party had seemingly failed to uphold its promise to hold corrupt leaders to account which was made just three months ago. “We described our stance as a ‘line in the sand’, representing our collective determination not to give any ground in our fight against corruption. “Now, just three months later, there is growing concern within society and among our membership that this leadership is not committed to the decisions taken by the NEC and our national conference.” Ramaphosa said that the NEC has been provided with no fewer than five legal opinions on the so-called ‘stepping aside’ resolution and whether the ANC could force members to step aside if they are facing serious corruption allegations. The president said that it was the job of the ANC to unite society – and that it can start doing this by respecting its own decisions and exercising its ‘revolutionary political consciousness’. At war with itself Ramaphosa also acknowledged a lack of unity within the ANC itself, with the most pronounced divisions seen at the leadership level. “These divisions are manifesting themselves not just in our structures but in public demonstrations of dissent and discord,” he said. “In recent times, we have witnessed statements and actions that are alien to the practices, culture, and values of the movement. We increasingly appear like an organisation at war with itself.” The president said that unity within the party is paramount to achieving ‘radical transformation’ in the country but also warned that it cannot be used as an excuse for corruption. “Unity is not about closing ranks, it is not about accommodating or condoning corruption, wrongdoing or ill-discipline. “Unity cannot be used as an excuse to turn a blind eye when some among us undermine and denigrate the revolutionary ideals of our struggle.” Read: South Africa’s second coronavirus wave – and when to expect a vaccine