The Western Cape government has welcomed a decision to allow the Sunday trade of wine at registered wineries and wine farms under the country’s new lockdown rules. In a gazette published on Thursday (18 December) by Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, the national government said that registered wineries and wine farms can continue to operate over the weekends. This includes tastings and selling wine to the public for off-site consumption, subject to strict adherence to the curfew and adherence to social distancing measures and health protocols. Wine tastings and the sale of wine for off-site consumption had previously been limited to Mondays to Saturdays from 10:00 to 18:00 under the country’s updated lockdown rules. “This new amendment removes this limitation which would have been detrimental to the wine tourism and agro-processing economy, which employs thousands of people in the Western Cape,” said Western Cape MEC Ivan Meyer. “The decision by the National Government makes it now possible for the Wine Industry to focus on what matters now – the rebuilding of the wine tourism economy.” While the Western Cape Government is concerned about the resurgence of Covid-19 cases in the country, Meyer said that it is critical that we get the balance right between saving lives and livelihoods. “Visiting a wine farm that is following careful health and safety protocols is an example of safe tourism behaviour during this difficult time. This is because it is primarily an outdoor activity with good ventilation, where social distancing is possible. “We encourage visitors to the Western Cape to visit our registered wineries and wine farms. By doing so, you will be contributing to the economic recovery of the wine industry.” On Monday, government announced that the sale of liquor by licensed premises for off-site consumption is only permitted from 10h00 to 18h00, from Mondays to Thursdays – excluding Fridays, weekends and public holidays. Liquor can be sold by licensed premises for on-site consumption, subject to strict adherence to the curfew. The consumption of liquor in public places, except in licensed on-site consumption premises, is not permitted. Read: Dlamini-Zuma updates South Africa’s lockdown rules