The festive season is upon us, and a new notebook would be the perfect gift for South African professionals. Additionally, with all the challenges faced in 2020, it is critical for students who are preparing to return to university in 2021 to have a notebook that can deal with their heavy workloads as well as provide peace of mind that they are making use of a reliable notebook that will not crash during their peak season. Bearing this in mind, now is the perfect time for your company to begin reselling HP’s extensive range of notebooks for professionals and students – which offer impressive features and performance. HP’s range of notebooks are currently in high demand in South Africa thanks to their high-quality components which offer great value for money and can take on any task. The HP ProBook 450 is an excellent notebook for those seeking great performance and extensive security features at a good price. These notebooks come with Intel 10th-generation processors and a crisp 15.6-inch display. The ProBook 450 also boasts long battery life in a sleek and light form factor, making it the perfect laptop for the professional or student on the go. Users who are looking for an even more powerful device should then consider the HP EliteBook. The EliteBook range consists of the 830, 840, and 850 laptops which boast 13.3-inch, 14-inch, and 15.6-inch displays respectively. They offer up to Intel Core i7 processors and Full HD displays – and all use an ultra-thin chassis to ensure great portability. HP’s range however, does not stop there. The HP EliteBook Folio is another great addition to this already impressive portfolio. The lightweight device boasts a 12.5-inch UHD touch display and is powered by an Intel Core m5 processor. Additionally, all HP’s laptops are designed with user security in mind – and come standard with software and security features, including HP security solutions and biometric identity authentication. To learn more on how to become a Pinnacle Reseller/Dealer for HP ProBooks and EliteBooks – Visit our Pinnacle page today Pinnacle is South Africa’s leading ICT distributor and offers a wide selection of HP notebooks that are perfect for professionals and students. These notebooks are the ideal choice for resellers looking to address the increased demand for reliable and secure professional devices in South Africa. Browse the full range of HP ProBook 450 and HP EliteBook notebooks from Pinnacle. This article was published in partnership with Pinnacle.