Resonance Consultancy has published its annual World’s Best Cities Report, detailing the best places to live in 2021. An advisor in tourism, real estate and economic development, Resonance’s best cities rankings quantify and benchmark the relative quality of place, reputation and competitive identity for the world’s principal cities with metropolitan populations of one million or more. The ranking is based on original methodology that analyzes key statistics as well as user-generated reviews and online activity in channels such as Google, Facebook and Instagram. Some of the factors that are considered include culinary experiences, museums, and sights and landmarks each city offers, to the number of Global 500 corporations, direct flight connections and mentions each city has on Instagram. “The World’s Best Cities rankings are composed of experiential factors that people consider most important in choosing a city to live and visit, as well as empirical factors that business decision-makers consider important for business or investment,” said Resonance president and chief executive officer, Chris Fair. Based on each city’s performance in the 25 factors analyzed, these are the world’s best cities for 2021: “The data collected for this year’s rankings provides a snapshot of the performance of these cities leading into the pandemic,” said Fair. “A year from now, we’ll be able to look at how Covid-19 has affected each of these cities and see which ones prove to be the most resilient during this crisis.” Fair notes that the planet’s large cities – with MSA populations of more than a million people – face imminent and myriad challenges that will define their next decade and beyond. “Data we are currently tracking indicates that there has been very little recovery in visitation to large city centers, and the loss of tourism has also impacted these cities the hardest,” said Fair. “But with the proper financial support and policies, cities can help bridge this crisis for the businesses most impacted by the pandemic in order to ensure they are able to recover quickly on the other side of this. “Without that support, it could take as much as a decade for large city centers to recover to 2019 levels of economic activity.” Read: Here’s how many South Africans have moved to Australia over the last year