The Department of Home Affairs is working on a new border system which will make it easier for people to travel to and from South Africa. In a presentation on Tuesday (11 February), Home Affairs minister Aaron Motsoaledi said that the new One-Stop Border Posts (OSBP) will be developed in partnership with the private sector and with neighbouring countries. “This model means that people and trucks will be processed by both countries under one roof. When we move over to this model, people and trucks will only stop once at a border and be processed by both countries. “We are pursuing the OSBP in association with other government agencies,” he said. This system will form part of the introduction of new Border Management Authority (BMA) legislation, Motsoaledi said. “Whenever we mention border control in the form of an instrument like the BMA many people, unfortunately, immediately associate it with solely a mechanism to stop people from coming to the country. “It is important for us as a country to keep on reminding ourselves that there are common security issues worldwide in border control. These are common to all countries regardless of their differences in immigration policies.” However, Motsoaledi said that the BMA will include a deployment plan for border guards which will stop people from illegally crossing into South Africa through the borderline. This deployment focuses on the hotspots which have already been identified, he said. “Among other functions, the BMA will facilitate and manage the legitimate movement of persons within the border law enforcement area and at ports of entry,” Motsoaledi said. “It is our considered view that the BMA will improve service efficiencies at the ports, through integrated operations. “It will improve the way South Africa handles border management thus to assist the country in delivering on regional mechanisms vital for the envisaged integration and free trade area for our beloved continent – Africa.” Motsoaledi said the department is looking at incremental establishment and rollout of the BMA to designated ports of entry and key segments of the land borderline. These ports include: Oshoek
Lebombo
OR Tambo International Airport
The port of Cape Town. Read:  SAA is only used by the ‘elite’ and should be sold: minister 