The South African Police Service (SAPS) is currently screening and selecting applicants for its Basic Police Learning Development Programme (BPLDP). Applications for the programme closed at the end of October 2019, with a total of 535,993 applications registered at 1,154 police stations nationwide, the SAPS said in a statement on Monday (3 February). Applicants were asked to apply with a senior certificate/national senior certificate.  They will also be subject to fitness, psychometric and integrity testing as well as medical evaluations during the recruitment, selection and enlistment process. “A number of applicants have already undergone psychometric assessments which include measuring an individual’s emotional stability and ability to function in the community service centre and within the broader SAPS community. “Additionally, the applicant’s level of integrity is also measured which aims to determine the susceptibility of an individual towards corrupt activities,” the SAPS said. “Candidates that have undergone and were successful in their psychometric and integrity assessments will be given the chance to proceed to the next level in the recruitment process.” The SAPS said that recruiting and selecting the right candidates to serve as police officers is of paramount importance to its continued success. “The number of applicants received were over half a million and it is encouraging to see how many young men and women in South Africa are ready to serve and protect their fellow citizens,” said the national commissioner of the SAPS, general Khehla John Sitole. “To ensure that we enlist disciplined, upright and passionate candidates, only the applicants who meet all requirements will be enlisted, hence the rigorous process that is currently unfolding,” he said. During the training phase, successful applicants will receive a R4,500 stipend and will receive official salaries should they make into it the SAPS ranks. According to salary data for South African police officers from the Institute for Security Studies (ISS), SAPS salaries currently range between R175,000 and R407,000. Read: Cape Town has just hired 500 learner police officers 