President Cyril Ramaphosa has announced that government will establish a new university in the city of Ekurhuleni on the greater Johaanesburg’s East Rand, which will focus on science, innovation and technology. “We have decided to establish a new University of Science and Innovation in Ekurhuleni. Ekurhuleni is the only metro in our country that does not have a university,” the president said. “This will enable young people in that metro to be trained in high-impact and cutting-edge technological innovation for current and future industries.” A new university in the region was first discussed in 2017, with executive mayor of Ekhuruleni, Mzwandile Masina, putting the official process to get approval for the institute in play in 2019. This followed the commission of a feasibility study on a ‘University of Ekurhuleni’ to focus in the areas of applied engineering, logistics, science, aviation, tourism and hospitality. “That study gave us the understanding that indeed there is a need and immense potential for a University within the city,” Masina said. Masina added that the building of a university in the city will also concentrate high numbers of people in a central area which will produce new human settlements, commercial enterprises and transportation networks that will all produce a dynamic urban centre. “This will inform the development of many business ideas that straddle the business, artistic, cultural and entrepreneurial value chains,” he said. South African universities South Africa is currently home to 26 universities (as defined by Universities South Africa), split into three different groups: There are 9 universities of technology focused on vocationally oriented education;
6 comprehensive universities offering a combination of academic and vocational diplomas and degrees; and
11 traditional universities offering theoretically oriented university degrees. South Africa’s newest learning institution, Sefako Makgatho Health Sciences University, located north of Pretoria, was unveiled in April 2015, adding to the two universities launched in 2014, namely Sol Plaatje University, in the Northern Cape, and the University of Mpumalanga. 