Commvault, global leader in enterprise backup, recovery, data management and the cloud, has a comprehensive understanding of the nature of data, protecting it and providing companies with the right solution that enables business to leverage omnidirectional data recovery. “As organisations send more data into the cloud and adopt multi-cloud strategies, the challenge of managing these environments effectively increases,” said Johan Scheepers, Country Head for South Africa at Commvault. “Disaster recovery (DR) therefore needs to be carefully considered. As a result, organisations should look at thoroughly planning their strategies and partnering with a provider like Commvault, who can help to automate workflows and deliver the speed, agility and granularity necessary for DR in multi-cloud environments.” Click here to learn more about Commvault Disaster Recovery According to poll results from a Commvault webinar on Cloud Disaster Recovery, many organisations (33.6%) have multiple tiers of Recovery Time Objectives (RTOs). The majority of respondents (36.4%) would prefer recovery time of four hours or less. However, in reality, recovery processes seldom go smoothly following an actual disaster. In order to achieve such ambitious RTOs, a DR solution must provide numerous automated features. In a multi-cloud environment, organisations can take advantage of the ability to back up and replicate data across any number of different cloud vendors. Using multiple clouds for data protection also means that you can avoid ‘putting all of your eggs in one basket’ so to speak. It gives the organisation the ability to back up one cloud to another, between clouds, across clouds or within clouds. “Today, data is a mission critical asset and this flexibility has become essential to meet increasingly strict data compliance rules, combat ransomware and maintain business continuity,” Scheepers explained. However, it is also important to consider that recovering data is not just about a ‘disaster’. From lost or accidentally deleted files to ransomware, natural disasters and even internal threat factors, there are many things that can happen to your data. Organisations need granular recovery to the point that a single file can be recovered quickly and in isolation without the need to recover an entire system or virtual machine. Certain elements provided by Commvault such as policy-based automation, Artificial Intelligence (AI) and other tools that watch for anomalies in the data infrastructure become critical to a successful multi-cloud DR plan. This is true for all levels of data recovery. Scheepers added that multi-cloud DR needs to start with the business goal in mind. It centres on strategy around data, including where it is kept, who has access to it, what dependencies exist around it and how it needs to be protected. “Companies should look towards a technology partner like Commvault who understands the nature of their business’s data and what can go wrong. In addition, they should look for a partner that can deliver and implement a solution that enables the business to leverage omnidirectional data recovery, from the cloud, to the cloud, in the cloud, across the cloud and between cloud regions,” Scheepers concluded.  This article was published in partnership with Commvault.