A growing number of successful South African business owners are applying for Australia’s Temporary Skill Shortage and Business Talent Visas, says Sam Hopwood, Australian migration agent for Sable International. Hopwood said that Business Talent visa gives you the opportunity to operate a new or existing business in Australia and immediately obtain a permanent visa, so it lets you stay in Australia indefinitely. “We are seeing significant uptake from South African business owners wanting to get into Australia on these visas,” he said. Hopwood said that the visa lets you work and study in Australia, enrol in Australia’s public health care scheme, sponsor relatives to come to Australia, and if you’re eligible, apply for Australian citizenship. Business owners must be able to demonstrate a successful business career and a genuine desire to own and manage a business in Australia, he said. A key factor is that you must be nominated by an Australian state or territory government agency before being invited to apply for this visa. “There are a host of qualifying criteria but most importantly, you do need to have total net assets worth AUD1.5 million or more, and the total annual turnover of your business must be at least AUD3 million.” Temporary Skills Shortage An alternative option is the Temporary Skills Shortage Visa which temporarily allows an employer to sponsor a suitably skilled worker to fill a position in their Australian business, said Hopwood. Businesses that operate outside of Australia can sponsor employees to work in Australia. These sponsorships help international businesses who want to establish a presence in the Australian market or have contracts in Australia that need to be services by the overseas business. This visa lets you establish your business in Australia and provides a pathway from temporary to permanent residence. In addition to the overseas business sponsorship, you will also need to apply for a Temporary Skilled Shortage (TSS) visa, Hopwood said. “It allows a South African business the opportunity to expand into Australia and sponsor employees or directors of the business directly on a work visa into Australia.” “The visa applicant must be nominated to work in an occupation on the medium and long-term skills list. “Depending on the occupation they might need a degree or specific work experience. The visa allows you to work in Australia for up to 4 years, and if eligible, apply for permanent residence.” Read: South Africans are leaving the country in ‘big numbers’ – here’s why that’s not good 