Sasol, the Sandton-based energy and chemical company, has opened applications for its prestigious bursary programme for 2021. “Are you a high-achieving, highly motivated learner in Grade 12 with plans to study towards an engineering or science degree in the 2021 academic year? If so, you’re invited to apply for an all-inclusive bursary from Sasol, the employer of choice in the chemical and energy sector,” it said in a statement on Tuesday (11 February). The bursary is open to learners who are planning to study towards a B Eng or BSc Eng in various engineering disciplines or for a BSc in Chemistry, Geology or Metallurgy. To be considered for a bursary within these disciplines you will need to get 70% for Mathematics and Physical Science and 60% for English. “If you’re interested in studying a B Eng Tech/ National Diploma in Engineering, you will need to get 60% for Mathematics, 60% for Physical science and 60% for English,” Sasol said. The bursary covers the following: 100% of the prescribed university tuition fees, registration fees and exam fees.
An amount equal to the average rate for accommodation in a single room at a university residence at the university at which the Sasol bursar is studying.
An amount for meals based on three meals per day, as determined by the university.
An amount of approximately R12,000 per annum, towards books and pocket money. It also provides comprehensive bursar support to help candidates to reach their academic potential and to maintain their personal well-being, Sasol said. Upon completion of your studies, Sasol said that you may be offered an opportunity to join the Sasol Graduate Development Programme. “With the scarcity of talent in South Africa, it is essential for Sasol to invest in tomorrow’s talent to sustain our growth.” said Monica Luwes, manager of the graduate centre at Sasol. “We want to give talented young South Africans interested in STEM an opportunity to harness their potential. We aim to help them to excel, not just in their studies, but in their careers.” Applications are currently open for the 2021 academic year and will close on 30 April 2020. Read: Shoprite has opened its bursary applications for 2020 – here’s who should apply 