The Shoprite Group has opened bursary applications for the 2020 academic year and is inviting top students studying scarce skills including Information Technology (IT), chartered accounting, supply chain management and logistics, pharmacy and retail Business management to apply. Applications from IT and data engineering students are especially sought after given the critical skills shortage in this sector, the group said. Comprehensive bursaries are awarded to assist with tuition, books and accommodation fees. Each bursary comes with a work-back agreement, which would see the successful applicant ensured a job opportunity upon graduation. As an employer of more than 147,000 people, Shoprite said it offers hard-working and ambitious individuals jobs at its various offices across Africa as well as opportunities at its Data Science Academy apprenticeship programme. During the 2019 academic year, the group said it awarded just over R17 million in bursaries to 282 students, including 178 women, 210 previously disadvantaged students and 59 students from other African countries. Currently, Shoprite has bursaries for the following streams: Accounting (CA Stream – SAICA) The Shoprite Bursary aims at attracting and funding talented chartered accounting students to become part of its finance team after completion of their studies. The bursary is available for first, second, and third-year students. Qualifications: Successful completion of the first semester of a Bachelors of Accounting or BCompt, leading to CTA and qualifying for a registered articles program 65%+. Data Science 2020 Shoprite said it has successfully started its own data science academy which is in its second year, producing top-level specialists in the field of data science. With a plan to keep this academy growing in the years to come, Shoprite said it is now looking for university students who have a passion for data and would like to make the data academy their starting point in an exciting career. “This bursary will help you cover your academic fees while you complete your university programme and guarantee you a spot in the academy when you graduate,” Shoprite said. Qualifications: Successful completion of at least your first year in maths/applied maths/statistics/computer science with a minimum average of 60%+ in your most recent academic year. Information Technology The bursary aims at attracting and funding future innovative programmers who have a passion and a vision for ensuring dynamic outputs in an area known for ongoing change. The bursary is available for first, second, third and Honours Students. Qualifications: Successful completion of the first semester of: A relevant three year IT qualification with an average of 60%+. BCom – Logistics / Supply Chain The bursary aims at attracting and funding future Logistics and Supply Chain specialists to join the leading, fast-moving consumer goods retailer in Africa on distribution and related activities. The bursary is available for first, second, third and Honours Students. Qualifications: Successful completion of the first semester of Grade 12 with an average of 70%+ or a Bachelors of Commerce: Logistics (Quantitative Management), Bachelor of Science: Operational Research or related degree/qualification with an average of 60%+. BPharm – 1st year, 2020 The bursary aims at attracting and funding talented Pharmacy students who have a passion for healthcare in the retail industry. The bursary is available for first-year students. Qualifications: Successful completion of the first semester of grade 12 with an average of 70%+ ND – Retail Business Management The bursary aims at attracting and funding future trainee retail managers who want to follow the lucrative management career in Retail. The bursary is available for first, second, third-year students. Qualifications: Successful completion of the first semester of grade 12 with an average of 60% + or National Diploma:Retail Business or equivalent qualification with an average of 60% + Read: This South African mega-retailer has its own private college – here’s how many students it has 