City Power, the City of Johannesburg’s electricity utility, is clamping down on individual households who consume too much power, in an attempt to curb load shedding in the city. City Power has implemented ‘ripple control’ – the act of remote switching of geysers – and ‘load limiting’, which uses smart meters to reduce the impact of the load on its grid. The power company has around 390,000 customers, of which around 150,000 have smart meters. These smart meters can be accessed remotely and switched off when households consume too much electricity. City Power spokesperson Isaac Mangena told Times Live that load limiting through smart meters can give City Power up to 70MW. The power company aims to install 330,000 meters which will yield 775MW. How does load limiting work? Eskom provides City Power with about 90% of its power. The state power utility will notify City Power of the required megawatt contribution needed. City Power then initiates the load limiting process by sending an SMS to customers alerting them to the percentage reduction it requires. It also sends a message to the smart power unit indicating the number of megawatts needed from a particular household. For those households using too much power, the smart meter disconnects power supply to the home. To get power back, that home needs to switch off non-essential items, until it’s power consumption is at a level deemed acceptable by City Power. Similarly, load limiting is the act of remotely switching off of geysers during peak hours, which gives City Power up to 100MW of additional power. City Power has uploaded a calculator for customers to calculate how much electricity their home uses, and which appliances use the most electricity. The power provider has said it wants to be less reliant on power supply from Eskom amid increasing load shedding, which has become a major financial burden on the group. Moneyweb reported that the bout of load shedding between October 2019, and January 2020, resulted in losses of around R60 million as the company was forced to restore substations and transformers damaged when power returned, loss of equipment, and pay overtime for technicians and operators. The group is currently conducting a feasibility study on the use of alternative electricity sources including battery storage, rooftop solar energy, and gas. Nedbank economists warned in a research note on Wednesday (5 February) that the heavy bout of load shedding in the first half of December likely catapulted South Africa’s economy into a recession. “Even though most high-frequency economic data releases in October and November disappointed, stage 6 blackouts at a time when factories were finalising inventories before closing for the festive season were most likely the straw that broke the
camel’s back,” it said. Read: Load shedding has likely sent South Africa into a recession: Nedbank 