President Cyril Ramaphosa has approved the salaries for a number of top government and parliamentary positions. In a gazette published on Friday (21 February), the president announced that a number of senior officials including the deputy president and ministers would not be receiving an increase this year. Other lower-ranking officials earning less than R1.5 million can expect to see increases of around 3%. This aligns with comments made by finance minister Tito Mboweni in his 2019 Budget Speech in which he indicated that the public wage bill is unsustainable and emphasised that the national and provincial budgets will be reduced by R27 billion over the next three years. To reduce the expenditure on remuneration, Mboweni said that members of Parliament, provincial legislatures and executives at public entities will not receive a salary increase during 2019/2020 financial year. These official salaries are also below the recommended salary increases for South Africa’s government officials as gazetted by the Independent Commission for the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers. It recommended increases of 3% for office bearers who earn above R1.5 million, and 4% for those earning below that. This would have seen ministers earning R2.47 million a year, with deputy ministers at R2.04 million. Members of the National Assembly (and their NCOP counterparts) would take home R1.15 million. The approved salaries for these positions are instead R2.4 million, R1.98 million, and R1.14 million, respectively. Among the approved salaries are the pay freeze for Deputy President David Mabuza, who will take home R2.82 million, and leaders of the opposition parties in Parliament. The DA leader, as the official opposition, will take home R1.6 million, while EFF leader Julius Malema and other leaders of minority parties will score R1.35 million. The official salaries are outlined below. Deputy president, Ministers and Deputy Ministers Members of the National Assembly and Delegates to the National Council of Provinces Premiers, Executive Councils and Provincial Legislatures Presidency approved salaries by BusinessTech on Scribd  Read: How much Ramaphosa, ministers and other government officials could earn this year 