Gauteng Premier David Makhura says that he is working with a number of provincial government’s in preparation for the new Lanseria smart city development. Speaking in his state of the province address (Sopa) on Tuesday (25 February), Makhura said that the city would not only impact Gauteng’s economy and infrastructure but also the North West. He added that the development will stretch from Lanseria in Gauteng to Hartbeespoort Dam in the North West Province. Makhura said that the city will not be designed for the ‘elite’ but will accommodate different social classes and categories as a ‘post-apartheid city’, echoing sentiments expressed by President Cyril Ramaphosa in his state of the nation address in 13 February. In his speech, the president said that the new smart city will be a ‘truly post-apartheid city’ that would rise to ‘change the social and economic apartheid spatial architecture’. “A new smart-city is taking shape in Lanseria, which 350,000 to 500,000 people will call home within the next decade. “It will not only be smart and 5G-ready but will be a leading benchmark for green infrastructure continental and internationally,” he said. Lanseria Mega Project The Gauteng government said in 2019 that the Lanseria smart city is designed to be a mixed-use residential development and business district. The existing Lanseria International Airport will anchor the project which will create 50,000 residential units and provide approximately 5 million square metres of commercial floor space. Crosspoint, in cooperation with the Gauteng Department of Human Settlements, will implement the Lanseria Airport City Mega Project over a ten-year period. According to previously-released information, the Lanseria Airport City will feature regional transportation nodes. The Gautrain will extend its route to include the Lanseria airport. The city also aims to be an ICT, training, and research centre complete with tourism and leisure attractions, and become a manufacturing, logistics, and business hub. Read Makhura’s full address below: Gauteng Sopa 2020 by BusinessTech on Scribd  Read: Gauteng is introducing a single ticket for taxis, buses, the Gautrain and other transport 