In an effort to augment enterprise IT teams and reduce human error, Extreme Networks has introduced new capabilities for its Extreme Fabric Automation software. Available as part of the Extreme Data Centre Fabric, the solution automatically manages the validation, testing, and operation of data centre fabric networks while providing critically important network reliability and resiliency. Click here to find out more from Duxbury Networking. Two new high-performance switches embedded with guest VMs – the SLX 9150 leaf switch and the SLX 9250 spine switch – have also been launched. “Collectively, the new data centre software and hardware will give IT teams streamlined network automation, simplified integrations and operations, and greater control of when and where data centre assets are deployed,” said Peter Nel – Business Unit Manager for Extreme technology at Duxbury Networking. Nel points out the key benefits of these enhanced capabilities: Simplified automation and cloud-speed provisioning: Plug-and-play fabrics with on-switch automation streamlines configurations and simplifies network operations with day-zero infrastructure provisioning and day-one tenant/services provisioning. IT teams can deploy a fabric in seconds after simply cabling devices, powering on the switches, and running the Extreme Fabric Automation application from any SLX spine or leaf switch.
Flexible deployment options: Unique in the industry, Extreme Fabric Automation is hosted on the guest VM of the SLX 9150 leaf switch or the SLX 9250 spine switch. It can also be hosted on an external VM, providing on-premises and private cloud deployment options.
Ecosystem integrations: Extreme Fabric Automation integrates with orchestration software including OpenStack, VMware vCentre, and Microsoft SCVMM. Each integration is a separate microservice and leverages the application’s fabric awareness. Additional integrations will be available in future releases.
Faster time-to-value: Elasticity built into Extreme Fabric Automation provides IT teams with the ability to scale the network up and down to meet changes in demand. Fast setup of an entire fabric network gives back valuable time in order for IT teams to focus on higher level projects that will drive the business forward. Additionally, the solution reduces the cost of operating a network and, for those leveraging guest VM, eliminates the need for an external server.
Built on Broadcom: The new SLX spine and leaf switches are built on Broadcom’s Trident 3 switch ASICs, bringing the same telemetry capabilities leveraged by leading hyperscale cloud providers to the enterprise. Combined with Extreme’s flow analytics, the Broadcom-powered solutions provide customers and partners with superior network health and performance metrics. “The data centre is no longer about speeds and feeds – it’s where digital transformation is won or lost. Extreme Fabric Automation is built using a cloud-native architecture to enhance fabric orchestration and management capabilities,” said Nel. “It offers simplicity to data centre teams, removing the need for manual switch-by-switch configurations and allowing IT teams to move at the pace of their businesses: at cloud-speed,” Nel concluded. For more information contact Duxbury Networking, +27 (0) 11 351 9800, info@duxnet.co.za, or visit their website.  This article was published in partnership with Duxbury Networking.