“Providing our customers with the best in store and online experience has always been our highest priority. By adopting an omni approach to retail we’re able to facilitate these great experiences” said Hannah Neil, Digital Marketing Manager at Cape Union Mart. Key to the facilitation of Cape Union Mart’s omnichannel approach to retail has been its partnership with Pargo, which enables Cape Union Mart customers to benefit from convenient Click and Collect at a Cape Union Mart store or at one of 2,500 Pargo pick-up points. “Swift response and quick delivery,” agreed one customer. “Good product. Pargo system also works well,” said another. Click here to learn more about Click and Collect at Cape Union Mart The process of buying from Cape Union Mart using Pargo’s Click and Collect option is incredibly simple: This Pargo powered process allows customers to benefit from shopping online, while also being able to collect their parcels from one of the groups 300+ stores, including Cape Union Mart, Old Khaki, Poetry, Tread + Miller and Keedo, nationwide – providing customers with the best of both worlds. “We realise that some of our customers are not always available to receive parcels delivered to them, so we cater to them to be able to collect their parcels when it suits them best at a store of their choice,” said Neil. Another brilliant element of this system lies in the fact that customers can interact with Cape Union Mart’s expert store assistants, who can help customers through any questions or queries they may have about their purchase. Through the implementation of Click and Collect, Cape Union Mart also offers its customers the ability to access quick and easy returns. Perhaps the best part of this system, however, is that delivery is completely free if you choose to collect your parcel from one of Cape Union Marts network of stores. Cape Union Mart is just one of several well-known ecommerce brands who have outsourced the logistics management to Pargo. In total, there are over 2,500 Pargo collection points in South Africa, including those at Clicks stores and Caltex petrol stations. Click and Collect is particularly useful for customers who cannot guarantee that someone will be home for delivery. Deliveries can be collected when customers have the time, including on weekends and after hours. For more information about Pargo Click and Collect delivery solutions click here. Click here to learn more about Pargo’s Click and Collect service at Cape Union Mart. 