The Independent Commission for the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers has gazetted its recommended salary increases for South Africa’s government officials. The commission is mandated to make annual recommendations relating to the salaries, allowances, benefits, and other resources required by some public office bearers to enable them to perform their respective duties effectively. The recommendations are based on consultations with the minister of finance, the minister of Justice, the chief justice and Lower Courts Remuneration Committee, and the Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs. According to the gazette, the commission has taken into account the financial situation in the country, and has thus kept its recommended increases below inflation. Specifically, it is recommending increases of only 3% for office bearers who earn above R1.5 million, and 4% for those earning below that. This would see ministers earning R2.47 million a year, with deputy ministers at R2.04 million. Members of the National Assembly (and their NCOP counterparts) would take home R1.15 million. A recommendation for president Cyril Ramaphosa is also included – at R3.08 million – however this is a determination to be made by parliament, as the president cannot set his own salary. Opposition leaders are also set for a healthy payday, with main opposition leader (currently held by the DA’s John Steenhuisen) set for R1.65 million, and leaders of minority parties, like the EFF’s Julius Malema, on for R1.36 million. While these recommendations are highly persuasive  – and often implemented – the official salaries will only be officially determined and signed off by the Presidency at a later date. In his 2019 Budget Speech, finance minister Tito Mboweni indicated that the public wage bill is unsustainable and emphasised that the national and provincial budgets will be reduced by R27 billion over the next three years. To reduce the expenditure on remuneration, he indicated that members of Parliament, provincial legislatures and executives at public entities will not receive a salary increase during 2019/2020 financial year. This cost-cutting has influenced the commissions’ recommendations, with a number of government officials receiving no increase or increase in-line with inflation. The commissions’ recommendations are outlined below. President, Deputy president, Ministers and Deputy Ministers * pending Parliamentary approval Members of the National Assembly and Delegates to the National Council of Provinces Premiers, Executive Councils and Provincial Legislatures Local Government Judges Magistrates Others Government Remuneration by BusinessTech on Scribd  Read: Eskom offers employees up to R400 million in cash to leave 