Load-shedding is back and it has never been more important to prepare for power outages. To make life easier and safer while ensuring that you can still work and live normally, Takealot has sourced a wide range of essential load-shedding products. Click here to browse Takealot’s load-shedding product range. From UPSs and power banks to generators and solar-powered products, Takealot is a one-stop shop for everything you need to stay productive and comfortable during load-shedding. The return of load-shedding poses a big challenge to those working from home. Without appropriate backup power, people are unable to use their PCs or home Internet connections during load-shedding, severely limiting their ability to stay productive. Additionally, a sudden loss of power can damage your appliances or cause you to lose progress on current tasks. Fortunately, Takealot’s range of load-shedding products include affordable and reliable UPS systems, inverters, and power banks. Examples of excellent deals include: RCT 1,000VA Line Interactive UPS – R1,475
Romoss Polymos20 20,000mAh dual USB Power Bank – R399
1,000W Inverter 12V DC To 220V AC Modified Sine Wave – R1,399 For those early mornings or nights where you are unlucky enough to fall victim to Eskom’s load-shedding schedule, Takealot offers fantastic lighting solutions. Light up your home with rechargeable and solar-powered LED lights, lamps, and flashlights. Ultra Tec SLS Solar LED Silicone Water Proof Bottle Box – R279
Kroma – 4 Led Camping Lantern – R53
Fenix Flashlight C6 V2.0 Micro USB Rechargeable – R799 For those looking to power demanding appliances, Takealot sells generators and alternative power-generation systems. Diesel and petrol generators, solar panels, batteries, and inverters can ensure that you keep the power on for extended periods of time. Generators and solar power components available from Takealot include: Ryobi 4-stroke air-cooled generator (2.5Kva) – R4,909
100 Watt Polycrystalline Solar Panel – R790
Smart Power Trolley 1KVA (600W) Pure Sine Inverter/UPS/Charger/Solar with 100mAh battery – R8,990 Takealot is fully operational and customers are able to enjoy safe, contactless delivery and nationwide collection. Takealot’s many digital payment methods also offer a convenient, fast, and safe way to pay for your orders. Additionally, customers can make use of 30-day hassle-free returns if they are unhappy with their purchase. Click here to browse Takealot’s load-shedding product range. This article was published in partnership with Takealot.