Samsung’s cutting-edge QLED TVs are a great choice for those looking for the best picture quality possible. The company’s QLED TV range includes the best products on the market, from high-quality 55-inch 4K panels to 98-inch 8K QLED TVs. 8K QLED delivers 16-times the resolution of Full HD, boasting 33 million pixels and an image quality unlike any other product on the market. Click here to learn more about Samsung QLED 8K TVs Samsung’s QLED TV range is also powered by the company’s intelligent Quantum processor, which automatically optimises screen brightness and TV sound control to any viewing condition and content. QLED technology uses quantum dots in the display to provide enhanced brightness levels compared to other TV technologies, as well as higher contrast ratios and greater colour ranges. These quantum dots are finely-tuned particles that can express real colours at 100% colour volume, delivering unparalleled picture quality. QLED technology also supports Quantum HDR, allowing QLED TVs to play HDR video at up to 8K resolutions. When paired with the advanced Direct Full Array backlighting technology on Samsung QLED TVs, Quantum Dot technology offers deeper blacks, less light blooming, and a more profound depth of detail by controlling the backlight in each zone to add depth and detail. It is also important to note that unlike OLED panels, QLED TVs do not use organic elements and are essentially immune to screen burn-in. This is an issue in which certain facets of an image shown on a TV screen for an extended period affect the display permanently. Samsung’s 8K QLED TVs are not prone to this issue by virtue of their advanced design. The Quantum processor built into Samsung QLED TVs dynamically adapts brightness, depth, and sound control to perfectly suit the viewer’s environment. This means that no matter whether you are watching in a sunny living room at midday or in a dark bedroom in the evening, Samsung’s 8K QLED TVs will always output the ideal brightness and contrast. In addition to supporting 8K content, Samsung’s QLED TVs allow you to enjoy a range of non-8K content at 8K resolution thanks to its AI upscaling technology. Powered by the Quantum processor, AI upscaling analyzes and upscales every scene you watch, no matter what kind of content you are viewing. Viewers who are watching content on one of Samsung’s 4K QLED TVs will also benefit from the image and audio enhancements delivered by its Quantum Dot technology. This suite of video enhancements, paired with the ability to upscale content dynamically, makes Samsung QLED TVs a must-have. This article was published in partnership with Samsung.