If your business is not advertising online, or has not adopted a digital-first approach to marketing, the time to change is now. This was the message from Google’s Marketing Insights team, who recently published a report on why companies need to digitally transform. While online advertising has been growing rapidly in recent years, the COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated this process. The reasons for this are easy to understand: People are spending more time online: learning, reading news, shopping, and watching series and movies.
Remote working is here in full force, and may businesses plan to make “working from home” a permanent option for employees.
Strong digital marketing can boost a company’s revenue and lower costs. In South Africa specifically, Nielsen’s Media ROI Benchmarks report showed that digital advertising gives companies the best return on investment when compared to TV, Print, Cinema, Radio, and Billboard/Outdoor advertising channels. As the largest business news website in South Africa, BusinessTech is the first choice for many companies who advertise online. BusinessTech offers a range of services and benefits which make it the best place to advertise your company, brand, product, or service. These include: Effective advertising products: Sponsored articles and display banners are the most popular and effective advertising products, and are easy to execute.
Quick turnaround time: We can launch your online advertising campaign almost immediately – there are no long turnaround times.
Trusted platform: BusinessTech is trusted by its audience and by the companies which advertise on it – which include JSE-listed firms, SMEs, and multinational corporations.
Excellent pricing and value-adds: BusinessTech offers competitive pricing for its online products and value-adds which ensure you receive a favourable return on investment. To find out more about advertising online with BusinessTech, contact BusinessTech MD Kevin Lancaster on kevin@businesstech.co.za This article was published in partnership with BusinessTech.