The Western Cape Education Department (WCED) is asking candidates to apply as temporary classroom assistants during the national state of disaster. The WCED said that interested applicants can register their profiles on its online system as part of its classroom assistant initiative. “The Covid-19 pandemic has completely changed how schools operate, with safety guidelines in place to stop the spread of infection. This includes ensuring that learners are 1.5 metres apart at all times – including in the classroom. “That means that learners need to be split over multiple classrooms,” it said. The WCED said that classroom assistants will facilitate lesson plans developed by teachers, and provide support in the classroom where needed. Assistants will be appointed at schools where educators have received a concession to work from home as a result of having one or more of the Covid-19 high-risk comorbidities. To date, 1,787 concessions have been approved but this number is expected to rise. “Applicants must have an interest in the teaching profession. Anyone who has an education qualification, is currently studying for an education qualification, or has an appropriate undergraduate qualification, can apply. “The stipend paid to assistants will be R4,000 per month if still completing a degree, and R5,000 per month if already completed. How to apply Interested applicants should visit the WCED website here and click on ‘vacancies’ to access the e-recruitment system. One there you should: Register your profile;
Click on ‘School-Based Educators’, and then ‘Teacher Assistants’;
Indicate your preferred education district/s;
Click ‘apply for this post’. The WCED said that there is no closing date at this point, and all interested candidates are encouraged to register and apply as soon as possible. “Our teachers and non-teaching staff are working very hard at present to prepare for the arrival of the next batch of grades. “I want to thank them all for their efforts, and look forward to supporting them with classroom assistants where we can.” Read: South Africa’s jobs horror show