International EdTech company, Crimson Education, has launched a private online high school – the Crimson Global Academy (CGA) – in South Africa. The CGA will offer international qualifications including the International General Certificate of Secondary Education (IGCSE) and A-Levels, the group said. CGA, which launched in Australasia earlier this year, said it is now enrolling South African students for the new academic term starting in September 2020. They will join a network of learners from around the world, including the United Kingdom, Europe and Russia. Students are enrolled in classes based on their academic ability, regardless of age, location, or commitments, allowing them to learn at a time and pace that suits them. “Students can enrol full-time and complete their entire high school qualification online, or they can enrol part-time, to supplement their education with internationally recognised A-levels, while attending another school,” said Rebecca Pretorius, country manager for Crimson Education South Africa. “The rigorous curriculum and university-style approach to learning sets students up for success when it comes to university applications in South Africa and abroad.” Pretorius said that teachers will deliver live online classes in real-time. “This is supplemented by chat rooms and multiple apps, which help learners to stay in touch with their teachers and fellow students. Feedback can be given instantly so progress is immediate,” she said. She said that CGA will also offer “passion-specific extracurricular opportunities”, mentorship programmes with graduates from world-leading universities and school social events that will involve traditional leadership positions, house camaraderie and school celebrations. Tuition fees start at R26,000 per subject. South African students can choose from the following list of subjects: English Literature;
Mathematics;
Further Pure Mathematics;
Biology;
Chemistry;
Physics;
History;
English Language;
Business Studies;
Economics;
French;
Spanish;
Psychology (A-level);
Information Technology (A-level);
Computer Science (IGCSE). You can find out more about the school here. Read: Thousands of Gauteng teachers ditch school