Health minister Dr Zweli Mkhize has announced that there are now 337,594 total cases of coronavirus in South Africa. This is an increase of 13,373 cases from the 324,221 infections reported on Thursday. The minister announced 135 new Covid-19 related deaths, taking the total to 4,804 casualties, following a 24-hour high of 216 casualties on Wednesday. He pointed to 178,183 recoveries to date. A total of 2.37 million tests have been conducted, with 48,130 tests conducted over the past 24 hours, Dr Mkhize said.  Since 31 December 2019 and as of 17 July 2020, approximately 14 million cases of Covid-19 have been reported, including approximately 594,000 deaths, and around 8.3 million recoveries. Imperial College’s Covid-19 vaccine trial will progress to its next stage, the university said in a statement on its website, reported by Bloomberg. Some 105 participants between the ages of 18 and 75 will be randomized to receive their first shot of one of three doses of the vaccine at a west London facility, followed by a booster four weeks later, according to the statement. “We have had a promising start but it remains too early to speculate whether our vaccine candidate will be effective in preventing infection,” Dr Katrina Pollock, clinical lead on the Imperial COVAC1 study, said in the statement. Tips to boost your immune system While there is no one specific treatment or preventative measure against Covid-19, a Johannesburg based doctor is advising people to stick to a healthy diet, good rest and exercising within the limits of regulations. According to the general practitioner, Dr Marlin McKay, there is also some evidence that taking supplements such as vitamin D may help with boosting your immune system against the virus. “This needs to be in high level, not the one that you buy over the counter as part of the combination,” he explained, adding that you need about 50 000 international units of vitamin D. He is also recommending a high dose of vitamin C – a minimum of 1 gram, about 100 milligrams of zinc and magnesium. “And just making sure that you keep your chronic condition under control; if you’re diabetic, make sure your sugar is well controlled. If you’re on blood pressure medication, keep on taking your medication to maintain good blood pressure control,” McKay added. According to the Department of Health, 8 million people are living with HIV in South Africa, 4 million with diabetes, while one in every three in the country suffers from hypertension. “Don’t become overweight, keep exercising, try to keep as fit as you can,” the doctor stressed. Also, drink a lot of liquids to keep dehydration at bay. Most importantly, if you have not received your shot of a flu vaccine, get one soon. “The flu vaccine will get you that level of protection at least against influenza in case you get infected with SARS-CoV-2 virus,” McKay said. McKay shared his views as part of the #ListenToTheDoctor campaign run by the Health Department on social media to spread awareness about the Coronavirus. According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), regular physical activity is good for your body and mind as millions of people grapple with the infectious disease across the globe. “It can reduce high blood pressure, help manage weight and reduce the risk of heart disease, stroke, type 2 diabetes, and various cancers – all conditions that can increase susceptibility to Covid-19,” the WHO added. To maintain a healthy diet, the agency said people should eat a variety of food including fruits and vegetables, limit salt intake, use moderate amounts of fats and oils and cut back on sugar intake. Also, avoid hazardous and harmful alcohol use and mothers are advised to breastfeed their babies and young children. “Eating a healthy diet is very important during the Covid-19 pandemic. What we eat and drink can affect our body’s ability to prevent, fight and recover from infections.” Also, the WHO warns against smoking. “Smokers have a higher risk of getting Coronavirus because they are constantly putting their hands to their lips.” Besides, if they contract the virus, they are at a greater risk of getting a severe case because their lung function is impaired. “Quit today to reduce these risks and start living a healthier life,” WHO added. Read: New Gauteng Covid-19 data reveals deaths by age in South Africa’s epicentre