Avo, the digital platform-based application is accessible to all South Africans, no matter who you bank with. Now available on Apple and Google stores, and conveniently on Money app for Nedbank clients. And for the month of July, every customer who signs-up stands a chance to win R5,000 every week. Android App
Apple App Avo is a super app as it reduces the need for multiple apps by offering a number of customer needs in one app. With the latest release of Avo, customers in selected areas can now order takeaway from premium restaurants including Café del Sol, Gemelli, Signature and Bellagio, and delivery is free. Scale is imminent with many of restaurants coming online soon. Existing offerings continue to be improved upon and expanded with the popular grocery shopping from leading retailers including Woolworths, Pick n Pay, Dischem, Clicks, Food Lovers Market and Jacksons, adding more locations regularly. With the digital Avo Wallet at the heart of the platform, customers and businesses can trade with confidence, knowing that trust and security is core to every transaction. Payment reservation features in relevant transactions provide the level of security South Africans need in an online platform. The popular Home Services offering matches customers with the right professional for whatever home services they need and protects the transaction with the innovative payment reservation feature. With over 20,000 service providers available for customers, Avo ensures the right match every time. With its own rewards platform, Avo allows customers and businesses to earn 1% cash back on all purchases and top-up transactions including data, airtime and electricity. The earned Avo Points can be spent anywhere on Avo, meaning customers will no longer collect different rewards, it’s now all in one app. In addition to Avo Points, grocery retailer rewards may still be collected when buying through Avo, making it an even more rewarding way to shop. Described as a first on the African continent, Avo is revolutionising the way South Africans shop and sell. Android App
Apple App This article was published in partnership with Nedbank.