Drinks maker Distell has launched a new website which will allow South Africans to order a wide range of alcoholic drinks for collection from their local liquor outlet. Distell said that the platform will connect consumers with more than 22,000 taverns countrywide and allows consumers to order any alcoholic beverage, including those offered by other producers. The group said it is first implementing a special pilot project in the Western Cape to test the platform to ensure quick, smooth and convenient user capability. “We are collaborating and working with selected taverns in the Western Cape, offering them support, educational content and tools,” said Wilson Khupe, Distell’s head of sales and distribution in Southern Africa. “Importantly, we are also soliciting feedback from these taverns to tweak where necessary in order to deliver a best-in-class solution. “Apart from the obvious benefits for consumers such as safety and convenience in obtaining their alcoholic beverages of choice, the system enables taverns to trade in a socially responsible manner, as well as allows access to data that will allow them to focus on what their patrons want and avoid the burden of unnecessary stock. “Distell is committed to assisting taverns, restaurants and other licenced establishments to continue trading responsibly, so they can generate an income, maintain staff and pay overheads during this challenging time.” How it works Customers can access the platform through the Click2Collect website. The platform allows orders to be collected from Monday to Thursday between 09:00 and 17:00, as per current government liquor trading and consumption regulations with only 20 slots allocated per hour, making social distancing easier to maintain. On accessing the platform via QR code or by going to the website, users need to confirm that they are of legal drinking age before being allowed to use the site. They are then able to use the search bar to find the nearest taverns to their home. They can click the red location item to choose their preferred liquor outlet. This minimises the need for travelling excessive distances to purchase alcohol and therefore limits potential exposure to the Covid-19 virus, Distell said. The consumer will then need to input their details, including their name and surname, e-mail address and cell number, choose their preferred pick-up date and time, and add their items to the cart before checking out. Once an order is placed on the platform, the liquor outlet and consumer each receive a confirmation via SMS, containing a link with the order details, ticket number and address of the pickup point. On collection, consumers are required to show their confirmation with their ID as proof that they are over 18 years of age. They pay for their order, receive their goods and encouraged to enjoy their purchase at home. Read: Alcohol and tobacco sales are ‘still open for debate’: Ramaphosa