South Africa’s coronavirus interventions are the response to changing patterns, and there is no formula or textbook which provides the answers, says Health minister Dr Zweli Mkhize. However, despite the increase in cases, Mkhize says that the country’s clinicians are ‘on top of the game’ and are prepared for the coming surge in cases. Speaking at a media briefing on Monday (20 July), Mkhize said that Gauteng still has the highest rate of infections, while KZN is slowly starting to overtake other provinces. He added that government is working to ensure that no one is turned away from hospital due to lack of beds. “There are those that may not be admitted, but that will be down to the doctor’s decision. So it will not necessarily because there is no space, it will be because the judgement is that you will be treated somewhere else. “I also think that the reduction of trauma patients is a huge advantage for us and will help us in the next few weeks.”   Mkhize delivered an ‘urgent and important’ plea to all South Africans around the country’s flagging response to the Covid-19 pandemic. “As Government, we have mobilised every resource, every faculty and wherewithal at our disposal to effect the necessary interventions. But government cannot manage this unilaterally. “Every single South African now needs to focus on adhering to recommendations pertaining to non-pharmaceutical interventions,” he said. “We are extremely concerned that fatigue seems to have set in and South Africans are letting down their guard at a time when the spread of infection is surging. We see poor or no social distancing in communities. “Masks are being abandoned or not worn properly and there is laxity setting in around frequent hand-washing.” The minister said that this will directly influence the rise in numbers in the next two weeks. “We must all appreciate that there is a direct causal link between the surge of cases and our ability, or inability, to adhere to these very basic principles. “We do not have a vaccine. We do not have a cure. Our ability to break the cycle of infection depends on our willingness to remain focused and disciplined and take non-pharmaceutical interventions seriously.” Read: South African restaurants to protest lockdown rules this week