Park Village Auctions (PVA) has announced that all the assets used for the Domino’s Pizza franchise in South Africa – including food preparation factories and 50 fully-equipped stores – are now open to offer. The sale comes following instruction from the joint provisional liquidators of Taste Food Franchising, Taste Commissary and Taste Food Trading, formerly trading as Domino’s Pizza in South Africa. Taste in March 2020 liquidated its foods business, following the group’s failure to sell the Domino’s licence in the country. Following the group’s move to exit the food business, it has registered to change its name to Luxe Holdings. The assets on offer are for stores and their contents – not the Domino’s brand licence, or branding rights. PVA’s Andrew Dix-Peek says that the entire contents of the individual pizza outlets are to be sold complete or combination of lots, distributed across the nine provinces as follows: Eastern Cape: Port Elizabeth; Free State: Bloem Royal Square, Bloemfontein, Bayswater; Gauteng: Alberton, Bellair, Blairgowrie, Boksburg, Brakpan, Bryanpark, Cherry Lane, Comaro Crossing, Faerie Glen, Florida Junction, Fourways, Green Valley, Hatfield, Montana, Les Marais, Pretoria (Church St), Randhart, Rock Cottage, Rynfield, Sasolburg, Springs, Sunninghill, Vanderbijlpark, Vereeniging, Waterkloof Glen, Waverley Wierda Park, Willow Way, Wilrogate; KwaZulu Natal: Phoenix, Westville Athol Heights, Westville Church Street, Windemere; Limpopo: Thornhill (Polokwane); Mpumalanga: Middelburg, Midwater (Middelburg), Secunda, Silverwater Crossing, Witbank; North West: Klerksdorp, Potchefstroom, Rustenburg; Northern Cape: Kimberly; Western Cape: Blue Downs, Brackenfell, Brighton Square, Claremont, Fish Hoek, Flamingo Square, Kloof, Milnerton, N1 City, Plumstead, Tygervalley. PVA said that notable store contents include pizza ovens; walk-in fridge and freezers; stainless steel under-counter fridges, racking, preparation tables, display stands, heat racks, shelving, extractor canopies; checkout counters and point of sales; chairs and tables. The preparation factories located in Midrand, Cullinan, and Milnerton, are also to be sold in lots or in set combinations. “The stores—fully equipped—stand ready to trade, allowing an investor to ‘hit the ground running’ in the current economic climate where food for delivery or collection currently reigns over sit-down meals,” said Dix-Peek. He added that offers close at 12h00 Wednesday on 5 August 2020. Read: South African restaurants to protest lockdown rules this week