South Africa’s increasing unemployment levels are a huge threat to future economic growth and the overall prosperity of its citizens. Statistics South Africa’s most recent Quarterly Labour Force Survey shows the country’s unemployment rate climbed to 30.1% in the first quarter of 2020. Of the 23.5 million people in the country that form part of the labour force, 7.1 million didn’t have a job even before South Africa entered the national COVID-19 lockdown. Click here to visit the ATVANCE ACADEMY website to see how you can be part of the change. Multiple companies have also had to resort to pay cuts or retrenchments in order to stay afloat. This has likely worsened the chances of job seekers securing employment in South Africa. The survey went on to highlight the value of skills development in getting a job. Many job openings require or favour candidates with qualifications in fields related to the duties of the job. Over 65% of unemployed persons in the labour force either had only a matric qualification or did not finish school. This is compared to under 30% of graduates and people with other tertiary qualifications who were unemployed. Additionally, the unemployment rate for persons aged between 15 and 24 years stood at a shockingly high figure of 59%. Educating and creating opportunities for training of the youth is therefore essential to avoiding an impending social and economic disaster. Even if affordability was not an issue, graduates have to look for jobs without possessing the necessary practical experience needed to get a job. Internship and learnership programmes therefore provide invaluable education and training experiences which increases a job seeker’s marketability and chances of getting a job. Since 2011, ATVANCE ACADEMY has been working together with its partners in business to implement compliant and cost-effective initiatives to increase B-BBEE levels, reduce financial impact on organisations and drive government’s initiatives in terms of youth education and youth development. Its 172 rapidly-growing campuses and 30,000 lives changed in the young black South African community thanks to their skills development training partnerships. ATVANCE ACADEMY focuses its efforts on bringing employers solutions within the Skills Development, Preferential Procurement and Socio-Economic Development elements of the B-BBEE Codes through the application and funding of various Government Tax Initiatives and subsidies, therefore reducing the expenditure and cost impact for our partners. ATVANCE ACADEMY learners can acquire National Certificate (NQF2,3 & 4) qualifications in the following disciplines: Occupational Health, Safety and the Environment
Project Support Service
Wholesale and Retail Operations
Information Technology
New Venture Creations
Contact Centre Support
Business Administration Services ATVANCE ACADEMY and its partners help upskill South Africa’s young job seekers, increasing their likelihood of getting a job, and lowering the prevalence of unemployment. Click here to visit the Atvance Academy website to see how you can be part of the change. This article was published in partnership with Atvance Academy.