On the hunt for a new part-time job that’s also remote, but don’t know where to start your search? Despite the effects of Covid-19, there are many remote, part-time jobs available, depending on your expertise, experience, and needs, says jobs specialist Glassdoor. If you are interested in roles to help aid your loss of income or to serve as an additional income supplement to your full-time job, part-time work could be a great solution. First, think about what interests you the most to guide you through your part-time job search. Be sure to apply to roles that accommodate your needs and availability, Glassdoor said. While part-time jobs don’t offer as many benefits like full-time employment, they can provide a lot of flexibility and opportunity for growth. Part-time roles allow flexibility with work hours, which might free you up for additional projects, more time with loved ones, or continuing your education. With a part-time role, you’ll be able to double your income, expand your skillset, network with people in your field or industry, and even to pivot into a full-time position. Here are 7 remote and part-time roles that will jump-start your job search. 1. Freelance Writer Strong written digital content with high-ranking SEO continues to be in demand for small, medium, and large companies. As a freelance writer or copywriter, you can outsource your expertise for business websites, blogs, case studies, ebooks, or marketing copy strategy. A few hours a week could provide a stellar resume and portfolio material. 3. Customer Support Specialist If you’re a natural problem solver, people person and enjoy troubleshooting, a job in customer service is worth considering. Many customer service jobs involve online work so you can work from home easily. The schedule is usually flexible, enabling you to work around your day job requirements or any other obligations. 4. Rideshare Driver Uber and other rideshare companies pitch themselves as one of the best ways to earn easy money and to create your own schedule. If you don’t have your own car, you can look into both companies’ car rental options. 5. Social Media Strategist Now more than ever, people are looking to social media to help them stay connected to their loved ones and favourite brands – and, of course, to learn about breaking news. Companies large and small are also looking for skilled social media strategists to take their brands to the next level while keeping their customers engaged. 6. Virtual Tutor Covid-19 has greatly impacted access to education and in-person learning for most students. Now is the time to lend tutoring services virtually to help students keep on track with their studies. Especially with students in a remote learning environment right now, the hours are flexible and parents are more than happy to pay. 7. Brand Ambassador If you have a high social media following, specialised skill or hobby, and a warm personality, think about becoming a part-time brand ambassador or social media influencer. Brand Ambassador/social media influencers communicate often with their audience on social media, provide knowledge surrounding products and share benefits on these products with prospective customers. 8. Data Entry Data entry is another job that can be done either online or onsite. To succeed in this role, you need to be able to type quickly and efficiently. For some jobs, you need specialised skills like knowledge of legal or medical terminology. Read: More than a third of South African businesses plan to cut jobs because of the coronavirus: survey 