Pick n Pay Online is now offering a larger range of non-food items for delivery in line with the government’s revised rules around e-commerce. The non-food items that are available online for delivery or “click n collect” under level four lockdown include home entertainment items like TVs and gaming, and white goods like fridges, freezers, ovens, dishwashers, washing machines and tumble dryers. Camping and patio furniture is also available, the group said. Delivery of these heavier items is available in all major cities nationally and “click n collect” allows customers to purchase their items online and collect their order from any hypermarket. Delivery appears to be a flat fee of R60. “The Covid-19 outbreak has significantly accelerated the demand for online shopping and many shoppers turned to Pick n Pay Online for their grocery shop,” Pick n Pay said. “Since the end of March 2020, Pick n Pay’s online shop has had more than 144,000 new customers registered online. This is eight-times more registrations than the previous year. Pick n Pay online also experienced a 200% increase in active transacting online customers during the period.” The group said it has significantly enhanced its online offering over the last year, including a change in its logistics partner and investing in a dedicated online customer services team. Jessica Knight, head of Pick n Pay Online, said that this helped the group rapidly increase the online shop’s capacity and reach to meet the needs of many new customers who have turned to online shopping since the country went into lockdown. “We have increased our delivery slots for our online shop, which has meant customers can now get a slot within a few days of placing their order. Customers can currently get a delivery slot within three to five days, depending on the area.” Knight said that the group is also seeing a high percentage of returning customers. “This shows how many first-time online shoppers are really enjoying the ease and convenience of online shopping. We’ve also made it very easy to shop online, for instance, customers have their own personalised ‘aisle’ with their favourite items and they can create a shopping list for regular purchases.” Read: Here’s how domestic flights could work under level 3 lockdown 