BusinessTech has cemented its position as South Africa’s largest business publication, with a record readership of 5.9 million unique browsers. This represents year-on-year growth of 139%. The April 2020 audience figures from Narratiive, the official traffic measurement partner of the IAB South Africa, further showed it served 18.2 million pages during the month. What makes BusinessTech stand out is the quality of its readers: C-level executives, business owners, and qualified professionals. Over the past month BusinessTech’s readers included 99,000 CEOs, 715,000 registered business owners, and 1.8 million business managers. These business decision makers are the exact audience which most companies want to reach, which is why BusinessTech has seen a rapid increase in marketing campaigns in 2020. BusinessTech’s excellent audience figures coincide with South African online publishers seeing record readership in March and April as a result of the Covid-19 lockdown. This is due to more people accessing news websites for the latest, accurate information – and relying less on other forms of media. With the Covid-19 pandemic and nationwide lockdown affecting the South African economy and the companies which operate in it, up-to-date and in-depth business news is crucial. BusinessTech editor Gareth Vorster said the Covid-19 pandemic has created a great deal of uncertainty for South Africans, who have gone online for information around the virus, jobs, and government regulations, particularly at a time when they have been cooped up at home. “BusinessTech leads in the provision of data-driven journalism, with accurate and up-to-the-minute news coverage of the pandemic, and its impact on the economy and people’s livelihoods,” said Vorster. “We will continue to ensure that our readers remain up to date with the latest business content as the country navigates its way through a recovery period.” The biggest business news websites in South Africa are shown in the table below, based on their April 2020 South African readership figures.  This article was published in partnership with BusinessTech.