With more South Africans at home during the coronavirus pandemic, there is a growing risk of people posting content lacking in sense or judgement on social media. Although there is now a regulatory ban on the dissemination of “fake news” in terms of the Disaster Management Act, there is no ban on earnestly held opinions, says Verlie Oosthuizen, a partner at law firm Shepstone Wylie. However, she noted that if those opinions descend into unlawfulness or they brush up against policies or rules which the social media user is obliged to follow due to their employment, professional association or other affiliation, the courts are unlikely to be sympathetic. “A cursory glance on the various popular social media platforms today shows that there are increasing levels of frustration and anguish during the lockdown and users are becoming less careful about the type of language that they use to express that,” she said. “It is incredibly important for citizens to be able to express themselves and to be allowed to criticise and interrogate their elected leaders and the decisions that are being taken regarding their civil liberties. However, that does not extend to the use of discriminatory epithets.” Oosthuizen said that South Africa has a unique history which also effects what is considered acceptable expression, and what is not. This concept has received judicial notice in two Labour Court matters in the past year, she said, citing the case of Edcon v Cantemessa an employee was dismissed for making an inappropriate ‘racial comment on Facebook’. “Cantamessa had referred to the government as ‘f…ing stupid monkeys’ and a member of the public had complained to her employer resulting in the termination of her employment. “In the Labour Court, Cantamessa argued that her usage of the ‘monkey slur’ whilst perhaps offensive, was not meant to be racist.” The court held that: In the case of Onelogix v Meyer, decided two months after Edcon, the Labour Court was deciding whether the dismissal of an employee for sending a ‘meme’ was unfair, said Oosthuizen. “The meme showed a white child, holding a can of beer, and smoking a cigar.” The caption said: The employee sent the meme to his supervisor in error and was subsequently dismissed, said Oosthuizen. “The Labour Court held that it cannot be correct to ignore the reality of our past and our racially charged present and to proceed form a presumption of neutrality…. the totality of all the circumstances must necessarily be taken into account to determine whether a communication that on the face of it appears neutral is in fact derogatory. “The court held that, if the meme was regarded as racist then the dismissal was justified and that the South African context and history was an important consideration. In the result, the court held that the meme was racist, given the South African context and that dismissal was justified.” Importance of cases Oosthuizen said that these cases are important to reflect on whilst South Africans are relying on social media as a source of entertainment, solace, news and distraction during this unique time in history. “As the Labour Court has articulated in the cases above, the history of our country will be considered in deciding whether a comment is regarded as racist or not,” she said “The rules and nuances that apply to other countries do not necessarily apply in South Africa and what would be regarded as a ‘neutral’ comment elsewhere may be regarded as highly inflammatory here. “Freedom of expression is vital to keep any government in check, but citizens need to understand that this freedom is not unfettered.” Oosthuizen said that criticism on social media should be carefully considered, cogent and unemotional. “The use of racist terms or innuendos will not be countenanced by our courts given our fraught history. “Given the heightened tension during this extended lockdown period, all citizens, online and offline, should be mindful of the manner in which they voice their frustration.” Read: New changes to South Africa’s coronavirus employee relief scheme and annual leave 