MTN says it has started re-opening its network of 410 stores nationwide, subject to strict measures being put in place to enhance the safety of customers and staff. Around 80% of MTN’s stores began trading on May 1, with all stores across the network open for trading from yesterday, it said in a statement. Limited trading hours, a strictly controlled shift system, 2m social distancing barrier markings, and regular health-checks are among the key proactive measures MTN has put in place. “Our focus is on continuing to give customers all the support they need to stay connected to their friends and family. Of course, safety is of paramount importance and we ask all customers going into our stores to please adhere to the protocols in place to help them, and our employees, to stay safe,” said Jacqui O’Sullivan, executive for corporate affairs at MTN. All measures comply with the specific conditions set out by the National Coronavirus Command Council and the Department of Health. Additional actions include limiting the number of items than can be touched in the store. All display items like handsets, other devices, accessories, starter packs and Y’ello Trader booklets will be removed from the front of the store and touchscreens will be switched off. Biometric devices will be sanitised with alcohol swabs before and after every use, and employees will not be required to handle customer credit cards. In addition, employees will be provided with hand sanitisers, reusable masks and face screens/ visors. Employees’ temperatures will be monitored daily, using infrared thermometers, and vulnerable staff (for example, those who are pregnant or have chronic health conditions) will continue to work from home. Other processes to enhance safety include limiting trading hours – until 5pm from Monday to Friday, and stores will only be open until 1pm on Saturdays and Sundays. Limited support personnel will be allowed in each store, and two store shifts will be implemented to alternate between working in-store and working from home. However, customers will still be able to receive the support they need across prepaid and contract services, airtime and data bundle sales, MoMo services, device sales, and sim swaps. Read: Vodacom launches 5G mobile network in Joburg, Pretoria and Cape Town – check if you have coverage in your area 