Health minister Dr Zweli Mkhize has announced that there are now 6,783 positive Covid-19 cases in South Africa. This is up by 447 from the 6,336 Covid-19 cases announced on Saturday – and the highest 24-hour tally to date in the country. Dr Mkhize said in a statement on Sunday evening (3 May), that a further eight people have died from the virus, taking total deaths to 131. He added that a total of 245,747 people have been tested, with 15,061 people tested in the past 24 hours. Mkhize said that more than 7.2 million South Africans have been screened.  Globally, coronavirus cases top 3.5 million, with deaths at more than 245,000, and around 1.13 million recoveries. Deaths from the coronavirus declined in Spain and Germany, putting pressure on political leaders to further ease restrictions that have strangled Europe’s economy, Bloomberg reported. The euro-area economy could shrink as much as 12% this year and fail to return to its pre-coronavirus size until the end of 2022, the European Central Bank said last week. And with a turning point in sight, with the infection’s spread slowing and lockdown measures being gradually lifted, the WHO is promoting the Swedish way of doing things, Bloomberg said. “Sweden represents a future model… if we wish to get back to a society in which we don’t have lockdowns,” the WHO’s Mike Ryan said, praising the way Swedes are trusted to “self-regulate.” In Sweden, restaurants, bars and schools have stayed open, and social distancing is encouraged rather than enforced by police. When looking at all-cause mortality — which is probably a better gauge of the real level of coronavirus deaths — Sweden has been hit with “very high” excess deaths since the start of the year, according to the European body monitoring these statistics. Like other countries, it has experienced a surge in deaths in care homes, where about one in three virus deaths is estimated to have taken place. Staff are expected to “self-regulate” but, according to reports, they don’t always do so. Swedes are becoming increasingly unconcerned about keeping their distance as time goes on, as images of packed restaurants indicate. Public-health officials have warned about their behavior. In Stockholm they’ve threatened to shut bars and restaurants. Sweden may very well turn out to be a relative winner of sorts, especially economically. It will probably experience a shorter and less severe slowdown than its European neighbors, said Torbjorn Isaksson, an analyst at Nordea Bank. Prepare for returning employees With a number of workers set to return to work from Monday under level 4 of lockdown, the Labour Department has drafted the minimum guidelines for employers to ensure the workplace is safe for returning employees. These guidelines come as government gradually reopens the economy under level 4 of lockdown while ensuring that the spread of Covid-19 is contained. Under these guidelines, returning employees must wear masks at work. Employers must also require members of the public entering a workplace to wear masks. Employers must provide each employee, free of charge, with at least two cloth masks to wear while at work or commuting. Employees with Covid-19 symptoms must not be at work and employers must grant paid sick leave or apply for COVID-19 Temporary Employee/Employer Relief Scheme (TERS) benefits. Employers must further appoint a manager from within the existing structure to address the concerns of employees and workplace representatives. “They must take measures to minimise the contact between workers and between workers and the public to prevent transmission. “They must minimise the number of workers in the workplace at any time through shift or working arrangements to achieve social distancing,” said labour minister Thulas Nxesi. The guidelines also require the employer to provide employees with information concerning Covid-19 and how to prevent its transmission. Employers are also required to report any diagnosis of Covid-19 at work to the Health Department and the Labour Department of Employment and, investigate the cause, and take appropriate measures. Social distancing With regard to social distancing, workplaces must be arranged to ensure a minimum of 1.5 meters between workers. If this is not practicable, physical barriers must be erected and workers must be supplied free of charge with appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE). Social distancing must be implemented in all common areas in and around the workplace to prevent crowding, including working spaces, canteens and meeting rooms. Screening In relation to screening, employers must screen workers for symptoms of Covid-19 at the time that they report for work. Workers with symptoms must be placed in isolation and arrangements made for their safe transport for a medical examination or for self-isolation. Sanitisers and disinfectants Employers are also required to provide sufficient quantities of hand sanitiser with at least 70% alcohol content. Communal and shared equipment must be regularly cleaned and disinfected. In relation to enforcement, labour inspectors are empowered to promote, monitor and enforce compliance with the directives. Failure to comply with the directives may result in the closure of contravening businesses. Read: South Africa’s unemployment rate could hit 50%: report 