Modern technologies like email, cloud, instant messaging, and the World Wide Web have made life much easier for both businesses and individuals. However, until recently signing documents digitally was more complicated than using pen and paper. One such example is the signing of documents. Click here to sign up to a 60-day free trial of Lexis Sign. While in the past you pulled out a pen and signed the document in person, these days communication is often done online, which can make signing documents a pain. That’s why LexisNexis offers Lexis Sign – a digital signing platform that makes the process both simple and digital. Lexis Sign is an established and reliable digital signing solution which simplifies and speeds up the process of signing documents digitally. Lexis Sign was built by LexisNexis, a leader in legal content and technology solutions for the South African landscape. Armed with their expertise in local legislation as well as building market-leading software, LexisNexis is perfectly positioned to empower businesses with solutions like Lexis Sign. Rather than having to print documents to sign and then scan to send them, you can use Lexis Sign to sign documents directly through your computer or mobile device. To do this, you will need to follow a simple five-step process: Lexis Sign is secure, entirely web-based, fully responsive and it is supported by most browsers. Sync Lexis Sign with your cloud storage solution, integrate it with your existing systems via API, or store your documents safely. We are in a digital era where businesses continue to implement new technological solutions to streamline their business processes. By embracing e-signatures as part of your greater digital strategy, you can save time that would usually be spent on printing and scanning documents. In addition, you will save money on paper, and by keeping all documents digital, improve document accessibility – not to mention saving you storage space and clutter. Lexis Sign is compatible with all mobile devices, making it easy for users to sign documents on the go. The solution is underpinned by the Electronic Communications and Transactions (ECT) Act, and meets international standards for digital signatures – meaning you can be sure signatures are legally binding. Digital signing is even more valuable during the current COVID-19 pandemic as many workers are operating from home and avoiding physical meetings altogether. This means it is particularly challenging to get documents signed physically and in person – making Lexis Sign a fantastic solution. After the lockdown, remote working is expected to be significantly more popular than it was before – making Lexis Sign a long-term investment, too. Lexis Sign even offers a COVID-19 screening form template for businesses that can be supplied to visitors to fill in before coming to their premises. Lexis Nexis is so confident you will like this product that it offers a 60-day free trial of Lexis Sign. This will allow you to experience the benefits of the solution before deciding whether to purchase it. Click here to start your 60-day free trial of Lexis Sign today!  This article was published in partnership with LexisNexis.