Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, has gazetted new regulations which will allow limited cross-country travel during the first week of the level 4 lockdown restrictions. Under the new regulations, any person who was not at their place of residence or work before the lockdown period, will now be permitted to travel between provinces, municipalities and district boundaries. The regulations state that this move will be permitted on a ‘once-off’ basis and South Africans will be required to stay at their destination until the end of the level 4 lockdown restrictions. This exception will only be permitted between 1 May – 7 May 2020 and travellers will not be required to produce a permit during this period. The regulations do not indicate how authorities will monitor for travellers which take multiple trips. Curfew The new regulations come as South Africa introduces a new curfew system which will limit the time people can leave their homes. From 1 May, all South Africans are confined to their place of residence from 20h00 until 05h00 every day. The only exception to this rule is where: A person has been granted a permit to perform an essential or permitted service;
A person is attending to a security emergency;
A person is attending to a medical emergency. The new permit is separate from the certificate which was provided to essential services by the Companies and Intellectual Property Commission (CIPC) during the country’s level 5 restrictions, and is included as a separate annexure in the regulations. It states that any person leaving their homes during the curfew hours must also carry some form of identification with them at all times. Failing to do so, they will be required to return home immediately, even if they have a valid permit. The curfew also places restrictions on business operations during this time. In particular, restaurants and fast-food chains can now make food for delivery, but only until 19h00 – giving workers time to get home before the curfew kicks in. Further, when it comes to exercising, the curfew also comes into play, albeit with much tighter restrictions. Here, people can only exercise between 06h00 and 09h00 in the morning. Read: Government pushes back start date for South African schools 