Standard Bank says it has launched significant improvements to its mobile banking app. The improvements on the app range across personal and business banking solutions and are immediately available, said Andrew van der Hoven, head of digital banking at Standard Bank. There are five new functions on the app: 1. Stop payment Customers can now load a stop payment instruction on a debit order via the banking app. You can stop a debit order for six months from the date on which we process your request. Customers will be charged a R30 fee for this service. 2. Home Services Tax Certificates Customers that currently have their home loan account linked to their banking app, will have the ability to obtain their Tax Certificate directly from the app. The customer will have the option to retrieve the current tax year and up to four years of historical tax certificates. 3. Card Straight-through Customers are now able to do an end-to-end application for a credit card and be able to do the following: Adjust the credit card limit;
Select Insurance;
Select their preferred delivery method and set-up a debit order account;
Sign and accept the cost of credit as well as T and Cs. 4. Unsecured Business Lending – Overdraft Business customers can now apply for an overdraft via their mobile phones and receive an immediate decision with an instant pay-out when the application is approved. 5. DigiMe In February, the bank launched DigiMe, a solution designed to ensure that your digital profiles are strengthened and secured and allow you a more frictionless digital banking experience. It involves a combination of two or more factors to authenticate your real identity. The end goal is to give you power of your digital banking profile – all you need is your SA ID document and to take a selfie. “We continue to invest heavily in providing the real-time solutions that customers want, giving them the confidence to bank safely in the digital world,” Van der Hoven said. Read: Nedbank launches new app for online shopping and other services 