Minister of Basic Education Angie Motshekga has detailed some of her department’s plans to provide personal protective equipment to learners. Motshekga announced last week that the country’s schools would reopen for Grade 7 and Grade 12 students on 1 June 2020. Responding in a parliamentary Q&A session on Wednesday (27 March), Motshekga said that every learner will be provided with two masks. She said that these will then be replenished later in the year in the case of loss or damage. Motshekga said that this decision was made because no child will be allowed onto school premises if they are not wearing a mask. Other measures announced include: Hand sanitisers will be available in every classroom for students;
Soap will also be provided in instances where sanitisers are not available or have run-out;
Sanitisers will be used to clean surfaces every day;
Extra precautions will be put in place at schools in high-risk areas which have reported a high number of cases. Motshekga noted concerns from teachers unions that protective equipment for students had not arrived at all schools, however, she said that all schools will have supplies for learners by 1 June. “The strict instruction given by (the Department of) Health is that priority number one is to ensure that schools are not centres of infection. Priority two is that they don’t spread infections. These are the priorities that were put in place before we even began talking about saving the (academic) year. “This is why there are going to be strict protocols from when students first enter the gates. There will be strict testing and if a school does not have a thermometer it will not operate. “It has not demarcated safe distances (between learners) it will not operate. If a school has not received its mask or other supplies it will not operate.” Motshekga said that in most cases children are at the least risk of facing harmful effects from the coronavirus. However, she said that that all protocols will be put in place to ensure that children do not contract the coronavirus at school and transmit it to loved ones at homes. “If they are not infected when they come in, they shouldn’t be infected when they leave school.” Guidelines Last week the Department of Basic Education (DBE) has sent a document to South African schools outlining the standard operating procedure for schools during the Covid-19 lockdown. The standard operating procedure document explains how a number of important issues must be handled. In the document, the government provides an example screening questionnaire from the Department of Health which shows the type of questions that may be asked of learners. These include the following: Do you have a high temperature?
Do you have a cough?
Do you have a sore throat?
Do you have difficulty breathing?
Do you feel weak and tired today?
Can you taste food and drinks normally?
Can you smell normally? If the learner or employee answers all of the questions in a way which indicates a lack of Covid-19 symptoms, they will be allowed to enter the school for a temperature check. If the subject answers any of the questions in a way that could mean they have Covid-19, or has a temperature higher than 38 degrees Celcius, they will become a “person under investigation” and will be isolated and referred for testing. If a learner or staff member is confirmed to have Covid-19, the school will be contacted by public health officials to identify those with whom the infected person has been in contact. Public health officials, with the assistance of the appropriate staff, will conduct a risk assessment and will provide recommendations on how the situation should be managed. You can read the full guidelines here.  Read: Here’s how much Curro’s new online school costs – with applications now open