As South Africa prepares for the move to level 3 lockdown from 1 June, a number of government departments have published new directives to assist with the transition. The latest directive from health minister Dr Zweli Mkhize, published on Monday (25 May), primarily deals with South Africans who have died from the coronavirus. It sets out the rules for the handling of mortal remains as well as the measures one should follow if someone has died at home. In a grim inclusion, the directive also makes provision for ‘high-risk situations’ where remains are not claimed within a certain amount of time the death rate exceeds the capacity of available space. In these cases, the government may intervene to facilitate mass burials and municipalities have been asked to identify land that can be used for these mass burials should a need arise. The final major inclusion in the new directive is a requirement that all persons returning to South Africa will now have to enter mandatory quarantine for a minimum of 14 days – irrespective of whether they have tested positive for the coronavirus. This will take place in designated quarantine facilities.  The directive states that this minimum quarantine will also apply to all aircraft and ship crew that enter the country. Travelling outside the country Mkhize’s directive comes after minister of Home Affairs Dr Aaron Motsoaledi has approved ‘essential travel’ for South Africans who want to return to countries where they are based. In a statement on Saturday, Motsoaledi said that the approval was made following consultations with the Department of International Relations and Cooperation (Dirco) and the National Coronavirus Command Council. Motsoaledi said that South Africans who wish to leave the country are permitted to depart only for the following reasons: Work;
Study;
Family reunion;
Take up permanent residency;
Receive medical attention. Extension for drivers and car licences The Department of Transport has published a new directive which outlines the validity of motor vehicle licences and registrations during South Africa’s 21-day lockdown. The seven-week lockdown has made it difficult for South African motorists to renew expired licences, and the government has published a number of regulations to extend the validity of these licences until the lockdown restrictions are relaxed. The latest regulations state that all documentation that expired between 26 March and 31 May will now be extended for 90 days from 1 June. This extends to: Learner’s licences;
Driving licences;
Temporary drivers licences;
Motor vehicle licence discs;
Temporary permits;
Roadworthy certificates;
Professional driver permits. In addition, motor trade number licences that expired during this period have had their validity extended by a further six months. A motor trade number is typically used to operate an unregistered and unlicensed motor vehicle on a public road in the course of their business. The gazette also states that driving licence centres, registering authorities, testing stations and driving schools will resume services from 1 June. This aligns with the country’s move down to level 3 lockdown restrictions. Police guidelines SAPS national commissioner, Khehla Sitole, has published a new directive aimed at outlining the role of responsibility of police officers during the country’s coronavirus lockdown. The directive has been published inline with a High Court judgement which ordered the government to ‘publish a code of conduct and operational procedures regulating the conduct of the SANDF, SAPS and MPSs in giving effect to the State of National Disaster’. Some of the key points outlined in the directive include: An SAPS member may only arrest a person if he or she has the power (authority) to arrest that person; Members must ensure that a particular offence exists in law before arresting a person for the commission of an offence; The directive notes that where certain conduct has not been criminalised (such as the wearing of mask or social distancing), members must sensitise ‘transgressors’ that their conduct is endangering their health and that of others; Members may not use private equipment not issued by the SAPS such as ‘sjamboks’. Read: 23,615 confirmed coronavirus cases in South Africa as deaths rise to 481 