Pick n Pay customers can now pre-order liquor from its online shop. The retailer said that it expects high demand from next week after government allowed for the sale of alcohol under South Africa’s level 3 lockdown. Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma said that the sale of liquor will be permitted from Monday and Thursday between 09h00 and 17h00. E-commerce sales will be subject to the same times, while no liquor may be consumed onsite. Jessica Knight, head of Online at Pick n Pay, said that they expect many shoppers to turn to Pick n Pay Online to restock their liquor supplies as customers become more familiar with online shopping. “Online shopping has been extremely popular with customers during lockdown as more customers look for a convenient way to fulfil their grocery needs. “Since the end of March 2020, we have signed up eight time more new online customers when compared to the previous year. Pick n Pay Online also experienced a 200% increase in active transacting online customers during the period. Many customers are shopping online for the first time and have become regular customers thanks to the ease of the online process.” Knight said that Pick n Pay’s same-day delivery service in partnership Bottles – an on-demand alcohol delivery app – will also resume liquor deliveries from Monday. However, she noted that all orders placed during the first week will be delivered the next day and in accordance with the Level 3 regulations. Retail Pick n Pay said it is also preparing to reopen its liquor stores and wine alcoves in its supermarkets ahead of the country moving to level 3. “We anticipate there will be a high demand from customers once we reopen our liquor stores and we are working hard with our suppliers to secure enough stock to meet the demand. Our supply chain is ready to restock stores daily to keep shelves full,” said John Bradshaw, retail executive for marketing at Pick n Pay. Similar to the retailer’s supermarkets, Bradshaw said that all liquor stores will follow strict safety and prevention measures when they reopen. The number of customers allowed in the stores will be limited and customers will be asked to adhere to the floor markers at all times to maintain safe physical distancing at all times. Hand sanitiser will be available for staff and customers and masks must be worn at all times, he said. All till points will have Perspex screens and ‘Scan & Pay’ technology so that customers can make contactless payment. All stores will be cleaned even more rigorously, including sanitising all till points after each transaction. Read: South Africa’s level 3 lockdown – what you need to know, including the times you can buy alcohol