If your business is leveraging the great value of Software as a Service (SaaS), it is critical that you have a backup and recovery solution dedicated to these services. This ensures that you are prepared in the unfortunate event of data loss. What you may not know is that while cloud vendors provide offsite infrastructure, they are not responsible for protecting your SaaS data against human error, deletion, malware, ransomware, or other risks. While some cloud vendors may offer data backups, these are usually for a limited amount of time, and are propriety. Ultimately, it is the subscriber’s responsibility to back up their data and applications – which is why it is important that you implement a SaaS backup solution such as Veritas SaaS Backup. Click here to start a 30-day free trial. Veritas SaaS Backup is a true cloud-to-cloud backup solution that offers automated protection for your SaaS workloads. The service offers a 99.9% uptime SLA and unlimited storage so that you can take full advantage of their cloud services. It is quick and easy to set up, and takes a variety of complicated processes out of your hands – including the purchasing and deploying of compute or storage, as well as the need to upgrade and manage your servers. This allows your IT department to spend more time on proactive projects, which in turn saves you money. Veritas SaaS Backup also saves you money by offering a per-user subscription pricing model, which means you only pay for what you use. This also means that you can use Opex budget rather than Capex to pay for your backup service. You can also monitor the status of your backup and restore processes and receive email alerts regarding these activities. Alternatively, you can view your audit logs to get a more comprehensive view of how the service has been running. Veritas SaaS Backup is compliant with the most stringent of security standards, offering 256-bit at-rest and 1.2 TLS in-flight encryption. It meets various security standards from around the world, including HIPAA, ISO 27001, SOC 2 Type 2, and ISAE 3402 Type 2. Veritas SaaS Backup also includes role-based access control, Single Sign-on (SSO) support, and multi-factor authentication (MFA) support. This means you can rest assured that your backup data is being stored securely should you need to access it. The SaaS business model has become incredibly common in recent years, meaning that there are many SaaS products on the market. It is therefore also important that your platform takes into account that you could be using more than one popular SaaS service. This is why Veritas SaaS Backup supports four of the most popular SaaS products – Office 365, Dynamics 365, G Suite, and Salesforce – meaning they’re ready to assist you with whichever of these SaaS platforms you want to use. Veritas is also in the process of adding more SaaS platforms to the already-impressive list – so keep an eye out for updates. Every minute your business does not have a high-quality SaaS backup solution is a minute your business’s important data is at risk. Veritas is so confident that its SaaS backup product will help your business that it even offers a 30-day free trial so that you can test it before making a commitment. Veritas is a trusted partner of many businesses around the world – join the ever-expanding family of happy businesses that use Veritas SaaS Backup! Click here to start a 30-day free trial of Veritas SaaS Backup.  This article was published in partnership with Veritas.