Here’s what is happening in and affecting South Africa today: Coronavirus: Global Covid-19 cases approach the 4 million mark, currently sitting at 3,917,575 confirmed cases, with 270,720 deaths. 1,344,133 people have recovered, leaving the world with 2,302,722 active cases, where 48,958 people are serious or critical condition. In South Africa, cases have seen another big jump to 8,232, as deaths climb to 161. Recoveries are also up, however, at 3,153, leaving the country with 4,918 active cases. Moving houses: New regulations published by the Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs will now allow people to move houses under lockdown level 4, but with tight restrictions. To move to a new place of residence, you will need a permit saying you can do so, as well as all the necessary lease agreements and documentation on hand. Movements have to happen before 7 June – and the movement of your items is limited to “furniture and effects”. [BusinessTech] Most will get it: South African virologists have warned that most South Africans will likely get Covid-19 at some point or another, but most cases will not be severe. This will happen over a few months or a year – which will hopefully keep strain off of South Africa’s healthcare system. More positively, the measures taken to reduce Covid-19 infections (and ‘flatten the curve’) will also help reduce the number of influenza infections this year, the doctors said. [TimesLive] Schooling around: Some schools are preparing to open as early as 18 May, despite the Department of Basic Education setting no timeline for when schools should reopen. In fact, the department is warning schools that have plans of opening early to not do so prematurely, saying outright that this is not permitted. The department says it needs to finalise its Covid-19 guidelines and protocols around going back to school. The plans for early opening are happening at both private and public schools, the department said. [Mail & Guardian] SAA falling: SAA’s business rescue practitioners have accused unions of trying to use the courts to slow down efforts to wind down the business, in the hopes that government will come up with a better outcome for the airline. The administrators said the Labour Court had no jurisdiction over the matter, the case was a repeat of one that already ruled against unions, and that the case as a whole was part of a socio-political agenda that the BRPs couldn’t be party to. Judgement in the case has been reserved. [Moneyweb] Markets: South Africa’s rand jumped on Thursday as weak business confidence data was outweighed by big surprise move up in China’s April exports that also helped its commodity currency peers. The market mood stabilised globally as Beijing reported a 3.5% rise in April exports, confounding market expectations of a sharp fall, raising hopes of an economic recovery. On Friday, the rand was at R18.54 to the dollar, R22.96 to the pound and R20.11 to the euro. [XE]