The Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) has further outlined the regulatory changes for South Africa’s lockdown level 3 which will begin on 1 June. At a media briefing on Thursday (28 May 2020), Cogta minister Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma said that all of the country’s economic sectors will be opened, albeit with restrictions. She said that the government’s strategy is based on sound scientific advice as well as international organisations such as the Whorl Health Organisation (WHO). However, she noted that due to the country’s unique economic factors the country has had to ease the lockdown. Some of the key prohibitions announced by Dlamini-Zuma under lockdown level 3 include: Public facilities for sport;
Entertainment;
Leisure or exhibition activities;
Gyms and fitness centres;
Sports grounds and swimming pools, except for the training of professional athletes and professional, non-contact matches;
Bazaars, night clubs, casinos, hotels, lodges, BnBs, resorts and guest houses – including Airbnbs;
Public and private game reserves;
Conference facilities;
All on-consumption premises like bars, taverns and shebeens;
Theatres and cinemas;
Museums;
Public parks and beaches. The following activities will be permitted: Sale of liquor will be permitted between Monday- and Thursday and between 09h00 – 17h00. E-commerce sales will be subject to the same times, while no liquor may be consumed onsite; The sale of tobacco products remains prohibited; Open travel between provinces and districts for students and teachers; The lifting of the country’s curfew (20h00 – 05h00); Increased exercise times – provided it is not done in groups and people wear masks; Most people may return to work. However, there will be limits on the number of people in the workplace, with 1.5 metres distance needed between workers; Food will be available from restaurants and takeaways for collection and delivery; No inter-provincial travel except for funerals or for essential services under level 3; Domestic travel will be allowed for business travellers; Every company must have a Covid-19 plan and a compliance officer. This plan should be known by both the employer and employees and must be available for inspection; No evictions are allowed during the level 3 lockdown. Hotspots Dlamini-Zuma said that the revised lockdown levels will be applicable to all areas in the country, with the exception of districts which have been declared as hotspots. These include: The City of Cape Town;
Tshwane;
City of Johannesburg;
Ekurhuleni
eThekwini
Buffalo City;
Nelson Mandela Municipality
The City of the Cape town;
A number of Western Cape municipalities such as the Overberg, Cape Winelands, and Chris Hani. Dlamini-Zuma said that depending on the severity of cases in these hotspots, minister of Health Dr Zweli Mkhize may impose stricter lockdown rules to curb the spread of the coronavirus. More information on these hotspots is expected to be published at later date. Read: South Africa will now have 3 different coronavirus ‘hotspot levels’ – here’s how it works