Technology group WeThinkCode has opened applications for its 2021 full-time, fully-sponsored two-year programming course – with 300 positions available. The bursaries cover the group’s NQF-5 course, with training to be held at WeThinkCode campuses in Johannesburg and Cape Town. “Each year WeThinkCode receives over 50,000 applications from young South Africans looking for a start in the growing technology sector, which is crying out for digital skills, particularly in the area of programming and software development,” it said. The course has been structured to meet the needs of South Africa’s corporate environment while bringing the best out of selected candidates. WeThinkCode said it has a 98% rate of employment among its programming graduates, at average starting salaries of R240,000. “Many of our graduates have subsequently been promoted to positions of seniority in their organisations,” it said. No specific background in technology is required to apply, and the course is open to anyone between the ages of 17 and 35. Interested applicants apply online, where their logic and problem solving abilities are tested. They can then attend an open day to learn more about the programme and complete a critical thinking test. Applicants are then required to attend a rigorous bootcamp before being selected and enrolled into the two-year programme, WeThinkCode said. The two-year programming course is certified by the ICT Seta and earns its graduates a NQF5 qualification. The course trains its graduates to be full stack developers equipped with the ability to build software solutions within any enterprise. “There are other economic and social drivers that make this course so important,” the group said. “The shortage of tech skills has been aggravated by the accelerated demand across the spectrum for digital transformation and accompanying skills as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic. “This is a perfect opportunity for smart, ambitious young people to rethink their careers in terms of technology,” it said. Interested applicants can apply online. Read: These are the most in-demand job skills in South Africa right now