Qatar Airways has entered into an agreement with local airline FlySafair as part of expansion plans into South Africa. The agreement with Safair will provide 10 domestic connections including; Port Elizabeth International Airport, East London Airport, and George Airport, Qatar Airways said. Qatar Airways’ passengers will benefit from access to 10 additional sectors in South Africa, adding more connectivity and flexible booking options when selecting their next trip. “At Qatar Airways, we continue to keep our promise in taking people home and connecting people via our rapidly expanding network of now 100 destinations,” said Qatar Airways vice president Africa, Hendrik Du Preez. “We are delighted to sign this interline agreement with FlySafair, further expanding our presence and travel booking options in South Africa. Since the onset of the pandemic, Qatar Airways’ network never fell below 30 destinations making us the airline passengers can rely on.” This is the second major middle-eastern airline to announce expansion plans into South Africa this week after Emirates entered into an agreement with regional airline Airlink. Emirates’ agreement with Airlink will provide customers enhanced connectivity via Johannesburg and Cape Town to more than 25 domestic destinations in South Africa and more than 20 regional destinations in Southern Africa. Emirates and Airlink will offer single-ticket travel and one-stop baggage check-in for customers transferring from Johannesburg and Cape Town to domestic points including Bloemfontein, George, Upington, Nelspruit, Hoedspruit and Port Elizabeth, as well as points across Southern Africa like Gaborone, Kasane, Vilanculos, Maun, Victoria Falls, Maputo, Windhoek, Harare, Lusaka, Ndola, Bulawayo and Livingstone amongst many others. Customers can book their travel with both airlines online at Emirates, through online travel agencies as well as with local travel agents. Safety Qatar Airways is the first global carrier to operate Honeywell’s Ultraviolet (UV) Cabin System, further advancing its hygiene measures onboard. In clinical tests, UV light has been shown to be capable of inactivating various viruses and bacteria when properly applied. In July, Qatar Airways further increased its health and safety measures onboard by introducing new personal protective equipment (PPE) for customers and cabin crew. The airline’s robust measures included offering face shields to all passengers, in addition to a disposable protective gown for cabin crew, which is fitted over their uniforms, in addition to safety glasses, gloves and a mask. Onboard, all Qatar Airways passengers are provided with a complimentary protective kit. Inside a ziplock pouch, a single-use face mask, large disposable powder-free gloves and an alcohol-based hand sanitiser gel are offered. Business Class customers also receive an additional 75ml sanitiser gel tube. In addition, for aircraft equipped with Qsuite, Qatar Airways’ award-winning business seat, Business Class customers are offered even greater privacy with sliding partitions and fully closing doors, and an option to display a ‘Do Not Disturb (DND)’ indicator if they wish to limit their interactions with cabin crew. Business Class meals are served covered on a tray instead of a table set up, and a cutlery wrap is offered to passengers as an alternative to individual cutlery service, in an effort to minimise contact between crew and passengers. Read: Emirates announces major expansion in South Africa through Airlink