Makro will run an extended Black Friday sale for most of November in response to the coronavirus pandemic and social distancing requirements. The retailer said that intensified efforts to minimise the spread of Covid-19, which include the proactive deep cleaning of all stores every day, frequent disinfecting of high touch areas, trolleys and till-points. “Excited customers can rest assured knowing that they are safe when lining up for what is going to be a four-week-long event with massive deals.” The group said that it will also offer its deals online for customers who do not is to travel to stores. The sale will run from 2 to 29 November, with new specials only available for the week in which they are announced. Makro said that these sales will not be offered again – so it encouraged shoppers to take advantage of the deals each week, rather than waiting until the end of November. Other features which will be offered during the course of the Black Friday sale include: 10% back in mRewards for the opening week (2 to 8 November) on non-promo general merchandise in-store and online;
Capped R90 delivery fee on all orders – excluding extended range items and commercial orders;
Free locker delivery on qualifying orders;
Same day delivery on grocery and liquor orders through the One Cart app;
50 new exciting deals every week. A month of deals “Black Friday traditionally sees high concentrations of shoppers in retail stores across the country, which can create a challenging shopping environment,” said Brian Leroni, Massmart corporate affairs executive. “Therefore, we have taken the decision to reimagine the way we do Black Friday in 2020. “In an effort to create a more consumer-friendly Black Friday experience while adhering to all Covid-19 and social distancing protocols, Makro and Game have taken the decision to extend the duration of our Black Friday promotion,” he said. Leroni said that the decision to hold a month of deals comes after analysing previous years of Black Friday shopper information. He said that the extended period will provide customers with more opportunity and time to benefit from the Black Friday prices as stores release new deals each week during the month of November. “These specials will only run for the week in which they are announced, and will not be offered again – so we encourage shoppers to take advantage of the deals each week, rather than waiting until the end of November as they normally would,” said Leroni. He said that more information about the deals – including some big-ticket items such as large appliances, electronics, home living items, televisions and more – will be provided in the coming weeks. Read: Balwin plans more ‘beach in the city’ developments, and 62,000 apartments in Joburg, KZN and the Western Cape