DStv has launched its new ‘add movies’ feature, allowing subscribers to ‘top-up’ their current movies offering. Add Movies allows Compact Plus, Compact, Family and Access customers to sign up for DStv’s dedicated movie channels previously only available to Premium subscribers. Subscribers who opt into this offering will enjoy hundreds of extra movies available on M-Net Movies 1, M-Net Movies 2 and fliekNet for an additional R99 per month, DStv said. Yolisa Phahle, chief executive of General Entertainment & Connected Video at MultiChoice Group says Add Movies was developed in response to customers’ appetite and interests. “It remains our priority to give customers both choice and value. Add Movies firmly delivers on both scores, with a wide variety of quality movie content at a compelling price,” said Phahle. DStv says it has reported an increase in audience figures during the lockdown period and the availability of both international and local content is a major deciding factor in users viewing habits. During this period, subscribers spent an average of five hours a day watching television and M-Net was one of the most popular channels with binging content for the entire family. The first month’s line-up includes movies such as Terminator Dark Fate (2019), Rambo Last Blood (2019), Playing with Fire (2019) and Fiela se Kind (2019). Subscribers will have access to a variety of movies from the following channels: M-Net Movies 1 (DStv Channel 104) delivers family-friendly animation, comedy, romance and award-winning drama;
M-Net Movies 2 (DStv Channel 106) delivers the latest adrenaline-packed action, sci-fi, fantasy and thrillers;
The popular holiday pop-up channel, fliekNET (DStv Channel 149), has now become a permanent fixture, showcasing locally produced blockbuster movies, classic favourites and a variety of Afrikaans film formats. The channel will also feature new straight-to kykNET films produced by South African filmmakers as part of the continuous investment in the local film and television industry. Add Movies is available for existing subscribers to add to their packages, or on sign-up for new subscribers in South Africa, DStv said. Read: Netflix targets mobile content to strengthen Africa grip