As a KPI (Key Performance Indicator), the ROI (Return on Investment) is essential for the determination of profitability of an expenditure, and the measurement of success over time, which greatly influences future business decisions. Vermont Sales is a member of SafetyWallet and as per the ROI SafetyWallet calculator, Vermont sales has seen an 7.7% return on investment thus far. It is important to note that, as a SafetyWallet subscription, the journey towards the highest Health and Safety compliance is not only beneficial to the company, workplace conditions, and other factors, but also makes a company a more favourable choice as a supplier. Not only is it cost-effective to ensure full Health and Safety compliance, but it is more than worthwhile becoming a SafetyWallet subscriber, as there are numerous rewards offered with each level of Health and Safety compliance upon joining the subscription programme. Sales’ Health and Safety road map can be broken down in the following few steps: Join the Friend Circle Membership, and
Maintain the Health and Safety Inspection Programme. Below is an FAQ with Vermont Sales about how SafetyWallet has helped it ensure and improve its Health and Safety compliance. Through SafetyWallet, Vermont Sales could ensure the active monitoring and assessing of Health and Safety hazards, along with any risks present at the warehouse monthly. All of the above could be done within a cost-effective framework with minimum human interaction. Through this, the status of a continuous safe working environment for employees could be ensured by implementing and maintaining a culture surrounding Health and Safety. With the Health and Safety support and services that SafetyWallet offers, Vermont Sales was able to conduct through its partner MAKROSAFE Holdings a cost-effective monthly Health and Safety inspections programme along with the provision of a monthly updated Action Request and continued telephonic support. In becoming a SafetyWallet member, according to the ROI calculator, Vermont Sales not only improved their Health and Safety compliance greatly, but the company was able to save R9,802.42. Through continued services and support provided by SafetyWallet, in partnership with MAKROSAFE, Vermont Sales can, with great confidence, see continued growth and consistent increases in the current level of Health and Safety Compliance. This also guarantee that Vermont Sales will remain a dedicated member of SafetyWallet in utilizing the support and services offered, and by doing so, reaping the subsequent benefits from the continuous growth in their Health and Safety System. SafetyWallet offers companies and business, in a variety of industries, the opportunity of a subscription programme. The aim of the latter is not only to encourage employers to become more compliant with the Occupational Health and Safety Act, but also to reward them for taking this step. The focus is not merely on compliance with OHSA, but with any other relevant legislation, regulations, and standards as well as metropolitan and/or municipal bylaws relating to all Health and Safety in the workplace. SafetyWallet helps its subscribers understand their level of health and safety compliance. Subsequently it provides employers with the necessary tools and support. This will equip them to improve on their Health and Safety compliance. When viewed holistically, SafetyWallet’s rewards to employers are calculated according to the following: The Membership Status
Compliance Level Rewards, and
The number of contractors as members with SafetyWallet. The initial rewards for becoming a member starts from sign-up and it is determined by the size of the business, and the number of employees per branch: Friend Circle – 1 to 50 employees per branch.
Family Circle – 51 to 100 employees per branch.
Champion Circle – 101 to 300 employees per branch, and
Pinnacle Club where there are more than 300 employees per branch. Further rewards can be obtained in the process of becoming more compliant such as with the audit and with the percentages associated with compliance. The highest percentage above 97% earns an employer with numerous rewards and benefits, one of which is a Gold Ranking, which is displayed on the member’s website. The four components on which focus is placed, in the offering that SafetyWallet provides to employers, is according to four components in Health and Safety in Industry and Commerce, namely: Health and Safety Training
Health and Safety Programme
Health and Safety Compliance Grading Audit, and
Member Advertising When considering the Health and Safety Programme, which paves the way towards full Health and Safety compliance, SafetyWallet offers employers two different ways in which the Safety Programme can be maintained, namely: Self Help – which encourages employers to take ownership of the Health and Safety programme which they implement by making use of the OHS Online platform designed for the implementation and maintenance of such, and
Outsourcing Health and Safety Services which is supported in the partnership between SafetyWallet and MAKROSAFE in providing employers with assistance in their Health and Safety needs in their journey towards compliance. The audit process is imperative for employers, not only to determine the level of compliance, but to identify any gaps which need to be filled to ensure full compliance can be obtained, in addition the audit this has an impact on the ROI. SafetyWallet offers employers a further 10% discount, which is obtainable based on the audit performance and result, which greatly affects the ROI of the employer or SafetyWallet Member. As a leading tool and accessory wholesaler, Vermont Sales has put its success down to the Blue-Chip International Brands that it provides along with its exceptional service to the trade in the past 32 years. Vermont Sales, Southern Africa’s #1 Powertool Accessory Supplier, has delivered exceptional service to the trade for the last 32 years. In doing so, it has developed the top brands like Tork Craft, Alpen, Festool, Triton, Pro-Tech, GAV, Kreg, Fixman MPS, Plugfones, RawlPlug, Olfa, Bessey, Felo, Saw Stop, Schroder, Bondhus, Drill Doctor, Flexipads, Accud, Multi Sharp, Mag-Switch, Nes, Spring Tools, Howard, and many others. “Powered by Service, focus has always been placed on our brands to develop each individually with its own identity and market position,” said Ryan Hunt Sales Director, and son of the company founder Roland Hunt. “As a result, the trade and consumers interact with each product without the emphasis on the company housing these wonderful brands.” Vermont Sales itself is now known as the foremost brand promoter in the trade. Many international manufacturers and companies wanting to enter the South African market have knocked on their doors over the years, as Vermont Sales have a proven success record over the years in competently representing and growing international brands in Southern Africa. “The growth in the company has also largely been due to the valued support of all customers, many of which have supported Vermont Sales since the start. We thank all our customers for the trust and support” said the Vermont Sales founder Roland Hunt. The ethics of integrity and straight dealing have led to their respect in the marketplace, and Vermont Sales has endeavored to offer quality and value in all products retailers’ stock and to continuously upgrade, improve and innovate the ever-growing range of international brands. Vermont Sales has very often been the first to introduce new innovative brands and products to the trade and has had the fantastic opportunity of offering their staff secure employment.  The very first employees have now gone into well- earned retirement, others have been with the company for over 20 years. Many salespeople started on the picking floor, or as merchandisers and telesales operators, receptionists have gone into administration and HR positions with great success. The original staff of 5 has grown to over 220. All staff are encouraged to improve and upskill themselves with the bursaries offered by the company. Respect, in equal measure, for Vermont Sales’ staff, its Brands and its Customers is the most important factor in the whole business. Heavy emphasis as always been on the training of the use of all tools and product sold, of both our own staff and to assisting resellers to grow their own businesses by stocking and understanding the product on their shelves. A regular schedule is in place for training of retailers’ staff in product knowledge, merchandising and sales skills. Courses are conducted by our certified, in house trainers, with their Vermont Training Academy Centre which is a free service to all their customers, the training academy operates from the new building with its state of the art training center/workshop and lecture room, the training academy also travels around the country catering for all the provinces. Professional demonstrations of the tools and products of each brand are conducted regularly to educate customers and end users in best practice. Demonstrations are conducted on a regular basis at retail stores and to end users. Huge support is offered by the international suppliers in this regard with training taking place at their own overseas factories and offices and personnel being sent to South Africa to upskill the Vermont Sales teams on a regular basis. This allows Vermont Sales to offer unparalleled support to the customer, with the future of Vermont Sales grounded in the foundation laid. Vermont Sales will continue to offer product ranges that provide effective solutions to the trade and trusted brands which bring above average value and return. This coupled with the goal of having continued growth into African countries and providing continued opportunities for secure employment for all their valued employees. Vermont Sales innovative out-of-the-box sales and marketing thinking has given their company the edge over their competitors and has added to their huge success. The company also created the Working with Wood operation and has now established many annual shows around the country. Another creation of the company is the bold Vermont Sales Open Day that has gone from strength to strength and has now established itself as a leading platform to show case their brands and products. These open days are all well supported by all their international suppliers, who launch and demonstrate all the new products, to the Vermont Sales customers. In addition, the company has been well rewarded over the years, with their regular annual awards for their outstanding service and sales to the trade. This article was published in partnership with SafetyWallet.