Gartner has recognised Versa Networks as a Leader in the 2020 Magic Quadrant for WAN Edge Infrastructure. “By 2024, more than 60% of software-defined, wide-area network (SD-WAN) customers will have implemented a secure access service edge (SASE) architecture, compared with about 35% in 2020,” said Gartner. Contact Duxbury Networking to learn more about Versa Networks. “Additionally, by 2024, to enhance agility and support for cloud applications, 60% of enterprises will have implemented SD-WAN, compared with about 30% in 2020.” The Magic Quadrant for WAN Edge Infrastructure Report evaluated 17 different vendors on 15 important criteria and positioned Versa Networks in the Leaders quadrant. Versa Networks was recognised for its ability to execute and its completeness of vision in the Gartner Leaders quadrant. “A Leader has demonstrated a sustained ability to address changing requirements for enterprise WAN edge. A Leader can drive, shape and transform the market, as well as maintain strong relationships with its channels and customers,” said Gartner. Gartner cites the following as strengths of the Versa offering: Versa VOS offers a comprehensive solution with strong capabilities with networking, cloud access integrations and security (SASE).
Versa’s growth has outpaced the market, demonstrating its expanding go-to-market strategy and validating its product capabilities.
Versa’s Titan service offers a simplified solution for MSEs looking for an easier user experience. “Versa has invested significantly in R&D, sales, and marketing over the last 18 months, demonstrating its strength in the ability to execute and completeness of vision,” said Andre Kannemeyer, CTO of Versa technology distributor Duxbury Networking. “The company has also made major investments in SASE (Secure Access Service Edge) which is built on the industry leading VOS (Versa Operating System) for both cloud and on-premises implementations.” Gartner said that the market for branch office WAN edge functionality is shifting rapidly from dedicated routing, security and WAN optimisation appliances, to feature-rich SD-WAN. “SD-WAN is replacing traditional branch routers with application-aware path selection among multiple links, centralised orchestration and native security, as well as application performance optimisation functions,” said Gartner. Kannemeyer said that Versa Network’s placement in the Gartner Leaders quadrant validates Versa’s strategy and execution. “Versa’s purpose-built Secure SD-WAN and SASE solutions power enterprise networks globally for connecting users to applications anywhere, anytime. Their platform is differentiated with tightly integrated security, superior application and network performance, and advanced software-defined and network functionalities for cloud and on-premises deployments.” Versa uniquely combines full-featured SD-WAN, comprehensive integrated security, scalable advanced routing, genuine multi-tenancy, and sophisticated analytics on-premises and in the cloud to meet WAN Edge requirements for small to very large enterprises, as well as service providers. Versa enables secure, scalable, and reliable enterprise-wide networking, increasing multi-cloud application performance and dramatically driving down costs (CapEx and OpEx). Versa Secure SD-WAN and SASE is available on-premises, hosted through service providers, cloud-delivered, and via the Versa Titan service for Lean IT. For more information, contact Duxbury Networking via +27 (0) 11 351 9800, info@duxnet.co.za, or www.duxbury.co.za This article was published in partnership with Duxbury Networking.