Listed education group Stadio Holdings, has consolidated four of its private tertiary education brands in South Africa, into a new institution called Stadio Higher Education. The new institution is a consolidation of the Southern Business School (SBS), Embury, LISOF and Prestige Academy. “Stadio represents a new vision, purpose-built to meet the real needs of South African tertiary students with credible qualifications constructed with the workplace in mind and delivered with a combination of online and in person – to allow students to qualify in ways that suit them, from wherever they need to be based,” it said. From 26 October 2020, Stadio said it will offer over 50 accredited qualifications across five faculties and ten campuses for more than 20,000 students. It said it has made a solid investment in technology and physical infrastructure and is ideally placed to cater to a wide range of student needs. This is shown by the fact that 80% of its students are making use of distance learning, said Stadio’s chief academic officer, Dr Divya Singh, “We’re completely focussed on providing rigorous, affordable and practical qualifications that produce employable outcomes for students,” she said. Stadio’s campuses are located in Johannesburg, Pretoria, Durban, and Cape Town and offer qualifications in: Commerce;
Administration and Management;
Education;
Arts and Design;
Science and Technologies;
Law. History of Stadio Stadio started as a subsidiary of Curro Holdings, which has been a proud provider of pre-school and school-based education since 1998. Curro is the largest independent school group in Africa, and was listed on the JSE in 2011. In 2017, Curro unbundled its interest in Stadio and listed Stadio Holdings on the JSE in October 2017. The intention was to create a separate listed business with a focus on higher education with a strong management team and a dedicated anchor shareholder, namely PSG Alpha Investments Proprietary Limited, to become the leader in the higher education market in South Africa. Stadio subsequently acquired further a number of registered higher education institutions, namely AFDA, Milpark Education, LISOF, Prestige Academy and Southern Business School, as well as the business of CA Connect. AFDA and Milpark Education operate independently, and the other institutions were consolidated with Stadio to form one Stadio Higher Education institution. Read: New lockdown change for South Africa’s schools