Pick n Pay has announced that it will be extending its Black Friday 2020 sale from a single weekend to two full weeks. The retailer will also be offering more deals in-store and online over this two-week period, said John Bradshaw, retail executive: marketing at Pick n Pay. “Black Friday is a very busy trading period so we’re extending Black Friday to two weeks to keep our customers safe and able to shop for great deals at their leisure”, said Bradshaw. “We will also be limiting the number of customers in our stores at any one time to keep everyone safe, with highly organised queuing.” Bradshaw said that Pick n Pay’s stores are more prepared than ever for this year’s Black Friday sale. “Extensive planning with our suppliers will ensure that all stores are well stocked for the new two-week Black Friday. We really want all our customers to be able to get their favourite deals. We will also be opening as many tills as possible for customers to keep queues to an absolute minimum,” he said, “Customers love Black Friday special deals to stock up on basic food or pantry items, but bigger items or luxury purchases – such as appliances and tech products – are also very popular. This year we are offering a greater choice across both these categories – both online and in-store.” Focus on online Pick n Pay said it will be focusing strongly on exclusive online Black Friday deals. Similar to last year, the retailer will run online-only deals ahead of launching its in-store deals, with new deals being added every few days. Customers can expect online deals across all product ranges on the retailer’s website. “Last year, our exclusive online-only deals proved very popular and our PnP online shopping team did a great job at getting goods to our customers as early as the next day,” said Bradshaw. “Many customers tried online purchasing for the first time during lockdown and are now much more comfortable buying exactly what they want from their homes. We know they are going to really enjoy online shopping for Black Friday.” Bradshaw said that customers will be able to sign up for 2020 Black Friday alerts on Pick n Pay’s website later this week. Read: Game and Makro’s Black Friday 2020 plans