Following the announcement that Game will run a full month of Black Friday deals in 2020, the retailer has further detailed its plans for the shopping period. This will include expanding its partnership with Uber Eats, increasing staffing levels for the month of November, and offering its popular ‘1 cent price surprise’ on all Black Friday purchases, Game said. The retailer said that its weekly deals will run from 2 November to 29 November, with each of the four weeks offering different deals. The first set of deals will be announced and launched online at midnight on 1 November and be available exclusively for that week. A partnership with Uber Eats, initiated during lockdown level 5 to deliver essential goods, will be expanded for the month to include small electronics and home office essentials, Game said. Increased staffing levels both in-store and in the delivery leg of the business will ensure a convenient and positive experience for all customers, it said. Consumers can expect a delivery timeline of 10 – 14 days on all Black Friday orders, with the delivery fee being capped at R90. Large items added to an order including fridges and chest freezers will carry a R70 surcharge per item, per order. 1 cent price surprise The retailer will also re-introduce its ‘1 Cent Price Surprise’, initially introduced for Black Friday 2019. The same Black Friday deals will be available both online and in-store, and newsletter subscribers will have early viewing access to all Black Friday deals, said Andrew Stein, vice president at Game. However, he said that Game stores will not open at midnight as they did last year; but rather the following operating hours: Monday to Friday: 09h00 – 18h00
Saturday: 09h00 – 17h00
Sunday and Public Holidays: 09h00 – 16h00 “As a responsible retailer, we do not want to encourage our shoppers to flock to stores at midnight,” said Stein. “Having the deals run weekly means more South Africans will be able to access our unbeatable deals in a way that is both safe and convenient. “However, it is important that consumers are aware that these deals will only run for the week in which they are announced – and they are never to be repeated. When these deals are gone, they’re gone.” Game will also run Cyber Monday deals on Monday 30 November, however these will run exclusively online. Read: Pick n Pay’s Black Friday 2020 plans