A collection of 140 classic and vintage vehicles, including a selection of rare vehicles from the world’s largest private collection of Mercedes Benz, will go up for auction in Johannesburg on 5 December. High Street Auctions director and lead auctioneer Joff van Reenen said the sale comprises a portion of the collection amassed by the late ‘Oom Louis Coetzer’, making it one of South Africa’s biggest ever estate collector car auctions. “Oom Louis’ collection – more than 350 cars in total – has become something of a legend over the years, as it outgrew barn after barn in Bloemfontein,” he said. “His passion for and knowledge of Mercedes Benz collector cars in particular was unparalleled and it shows in the spectacular selection of Mercs that’ll go on auction in December. “Collectors from across the world are showing interest in the catalogue which includes some of the most sought-after Benz designs of the past 70 years, as well as a vast number of American muscle cars and other assorted collector classics.” Among the vehicles going under the hammer are: A 1958 Mercedes Benz owned by David Beresford Pratt, a South African businessman and anti-apartheid activist who shot Prime Minister Hendrik Verwoerd in 1960. Verwoerd survived, but was killed six years later by Dimitri Tsafendas;
A 1964 Mercedes Benz Coupe 220SE;
A 1967 Mercedes Benz 230S Fintail Station Wagon, believed to be the only model of this kind in South Africa;
A 1958 Mercedes Benz 300;
A 1957 Mercedes Benz Ponton 109 Station Wagon, believed to be the only model of this kind in the country;
Various early Chevrolet Impalas and Belairs;
A 1959 Chevrolet Kingswood Station Wagon;
A 1958 MG Magnette;
A 1962 Pontiac Parisienne Convertible; and a
A 1979 Chevrolet Corvette. Van Reenen said in a South African car auction first, virtual tours of every vehicle will be available online – from exterior walk-arounds to interior and engine bay tours. “This has never before been done for any car auction but it’s essential for national and international enthusiasts who won’t be able to get to Johannesburg between Monday (30 November) and Friday (4 December) to view the cars at the Creative Rides showroom ahead of the sale on Saturday (5 December).” Van Reenen says pre-registration with FICA documents is essential for all bidders, and a R25,000 registration fee is required to participate in the sale. Read: The most affordable cars to own in South Africa