August was a big month for the many South African Galaxy Note fans when Samsung unveiled the Galaxy Note20 Series. The series comes in two versions: Galaxy Note20 Ultra, designed for Note fans who demand the ultimate in power and productivity, and Galaxy Note20, for broader Note users looking to maximise their time for work and play. Click here to learn more about the Galaxy Note20 smartphones Renowned filmmaker Tebogo Malope demonstrated the breathtaking features of the new device at the local launch. Tebogo Malope has grown a reputation for being the voice for African narratives. The award-winning filmmaker, recognised for directing Africa’s first Netflix original series, has received every award possible for his commercials and music videos in South Africa, and has even shot a music video with the Galaxy S20 Ultra. This is why his unique perspective on the new Galaxy Note20 Series was so fascinating. This is what he had to say. The design looks incredible but as a filmmaker, I immediately reached for the camera. I’m taken aback by the pro-grade camera, where you can shoot in 8K resolution. The capabilities of the audio are also incredible. I often shoot on film cameras, like I’ve done for Netflix where a lot of new content is shot in 4K. However, these devices open up a new world of possibilities, with both 4K and 8K functionality and zoom capabilities any director would love to experiment with. So whether you’re a pro or amateur that level of cinematic quality enhances what you can do with a smartphone. What struck me was the S Pen. It’s clear it can be used effortlessly in meetings because it feels like a real pen and as I write, my notes are saved and immediately adaptable for various formats for use within the device, on a PC and in presentations. I love the fact that I can record my directions verbally and take notes, which are then synced perfectly on playback. I can definitely also see possibilities for storyboard artists using it to bring their ideas to life effectively and quickly. From taking notes on set to production meetings, the device will allow my team to save time. We often lose the papers we’ve scribbled in-the-moment thoughts on so it will be great to know the good ideas are safely saved on the Galaxy Note20. Because filming can go on long into the night the powerful all-day battery and the fast charge will be greatly appreciated on set. Additionally, the device links seamlessly to laptops through Wireless DeX to ensure we can review and work on the footage, scripts and new ideas. Lights, camera and action – clearly the Galaxy Note20 Ultra passes the director’s test. Tebogo Malope is set to join the Galaxy Note fans to turn every day into the opportunity to work and play.  This article was published in partnership with Samsung.