Online retailer Takealot will extend its annual Blue Dot Sale from five days to the entire month of November. In the lead-up to the Blue Dot Sale, which kicks off at one-minute past midnight on Black Friday (27 November), Takealot said it will offer three weeks of Blue Dot Countdown deals. “From 2 – 26 November, Takealot.com will release thousands of new deals every week. “These Blue Dot Countdown deals won’t be beaten on Black Friday and stock is limited, meaning that shoppers need to act fast as well as return each week to take advantage of incredible new deals and savings,” the group said. Week one (2 – 8 November) shoppers can expect big deals on big stuff, including TVs, large appliances, outdoor, pool and patio, beauty, plus so much more;
Week two (9 – 15 November), there will be massive deals on laptops, toys, homeware, furniture, fashion, sports and footwear;
Week three (16 – 22 November) will see new deals released on camping and outdoor, home improvement and power tools, as well as household essentials. Takealot said it will also be giving their shoppers exclusive early access to some of its Black Friday deals from 23 – 26 November. Over 200 fresh new deals will be released daily exclusively on the Takealot App, it said. On the day Takealot’s Blue Dot Sale is a five-day sale period which starts at one-minute past midnight on Black Friday with over 5,000 deals planned. A range of new deals will be released throughout the weekend as well as on Cyber Monday (30 November) and Takealot Tuesday (1 December) with up to 50% off thousands of items, the group said. These deals will include savings across various product categories, from electronics and appliances to garden furniture and homeware, as well as camping and outdoor equipment, toys and baby products. “We’re excited to give our shoppers more entertainment and even more time to shop this year. There’s no reason to wait until Black Friday for some of our best deals,” said Julie-Anne Walsh, chief marketing officer at Takealot.com. Improvements to online systems Walsh said Takealot has also taken steps to prepare for the influx of Black Friday shoppers. “We’ve always aimed to offer a customer-centric online experience that takes the queueing and hassle of in-store shopping out of Black Friday and festive shopping, and this year is no different. “The fact that we’re an online retailer is more important than ever as the world adjusts to social distancing protocols. This positions eCommerce as the safest, most convenient way to shop this festive season,” she said. Walsh said that Takelaot now has close to 60 pickup points in Gauteng, the Eastern Cape, Western Cape, Kwa-Zulu Natal, Limpopo, Free State and Mpumalanga for those wishing to avoid queues. “eCommerce has never been as relevant to consumers as it is now. The convenience, and safety, of shopping online has seen a huge increase in the adoption of eCommerce around the country. ” “We appreciate that this – combined with a month-long focus on the best deals – will fundamentally redefine the retail landscape for shoppers, by giving them a better way to shop,” she said. Read: Woolworths Black Friday 2020 plans