The COVID-19 pandemic has forced businesses to change their habits and adopt new technologies. A clear example of this is the signing of documents, as businesses could no longer support the pen-and-paper signing process. Businesses had to find alternative ways to sign documents and this resulted in digital signature solutions becoming increasingly popular and vitally important. Businesses that have begun using digital signature solutions during the lockdown have seen major benefits. Electronic signatures use advanced cryptographic techniques to ensure ultimate security and integrity.
These solutions are accessible from anywhere and at any time, making it easy to sign documents on the go.
By removing the need to print out and photocopy documents repeatedly, the document does not lose legibility.
Digital signatures require minimal hand-to-hand contact which makes it easier to abide by COVID-19 best practices.
There is no need to purchase additional hardware or devices, as you can simply use the devices you already have.
Streamlined digital signature processes make it easier to get documents signed faster.
Electronic signatures are eco-friendly as you don’t need to print out documents. It is also worth noting that digital signatures are legally binding, and well-equipped digital signature products, like Lexis Sign, offer an advanced electronic signature (AES) – a particularly reliable form of signature provided for in the ECT Act. It is important that you use a digital signature solution that offers an AES because where laws such as the Deeds Registries Act require a signature, only an AES will be valid. For example, the use of an AES by conveyancers is a legal requirement for the Power of Attorney to Transfer Property. Lexis Sign is a market-leading electronic signature solution that enables businesses to get their documents signed quickly using digital devices such as tablets, smartphones, and computers. Users benefit from rigorous security and encryption protocols which ensure that all signatures done through the platform are legally binding in accordance with the ECT Act. Lexis Sign also supports a broad range of document types including applications, proxies, permits, resolutions, mandates, agreements, insurance claims, financial statements, legal and banking documents, acceptance of terms and conditions, consent forms, tender documents, and contracts. It is incredibly easy to use Lexis Sign – you simply use your mouse to ‘draw’ your signature, or alternatively can use a tablet or any other touchscreen device. When this signature is done, the document is sent back to the party that originally requested the signature, meaning the document can be signed in mere seconds – even if the two parties involved are on opposite ends of the country. Click here to start your 60-day free trial of Lexis Sign today. Join George Findlay, LexisNexis Corporate Software Specialist, for a FREE WEBINAR as he as he unpacks the legitimacy and validity of electronic signatures in the new working world. This session will be an in-depth look at the authenticity of electronic signatures and the safety component of these with reference to cybersecurity. Webinar Details: Title: The Validity of Electronic Signatures and CyberSecurity Date: 23 October 2020 Time: 10h00 Webinar link: http://ow.ly/gujB50BUoX8 Lexis Nexis is so confident you will benefit from its product that it offers a 60-day free trial of Lexis Sign. This will allow you to experience the benefits of the solution before deciding whether to purchase it. This article was published in partnership with Lexis Nexis.