We all have experienced the frustration of a noisy working environment. Maybe you are trying to take part in Zoom meetings, but your children are causing a racket? Perhaps your colleagues are constantly chatting and being disruptive in your open-plan office while you are trying to stay productive? No matter how your work environment is being made noisy – you need a way to block out these distractions. ASUS has developed products that assist in the cancellation of all external noises in the form of the TUF Gaming H3 headset and AI noise-cancelling mic adapter. They offer great audio quality and robust noise cancelling, helping you keep in contact with your colleagues and clients in any situation. Click here to learn about the ASUS TUF Gaming H3 headset and the noise-cancelling mic adapter. The TUF Gaming H3 headset offers 7.1 surround sound to ensure that you get a full audio experience, which is then amplified by an impressive audio profile that offers deep bass and incredibly clear sound. This is thanks to the ASUS 50mm Essence drivers, as well as its exclusive airtight chamber technology, which ensure that you get the ultimate listening experience even in noisy locations. The ASUS TUF Gaming H3 headset also comes with a high-quality analogue microphone which ensures you can communicate with your friends or colleagues clearly. The ASUS AI noise-cancelling mic adapter is the perfect partner for the TUF Gaming H3 headset. This adapter offers a USB-C to 3.5mm connection, which is great if you are using your smartphone or a similar mobile device. Alternatively, you can plug the connecter into a USB 2.0 adapter to connect your ASUS TUF Gaming H3 headset to your PC. As the name suggests, this adapter places a major focus on its noise-cancelling technology and enhances the performance of your headset’s microphone by minimising background noise. This is driven by powerful AI technology and means that those who are listening to you talk will not be subjected to the buzz of your surroundings. When used in combination, these two ASUS products provide the perfect communication solution in noisy areas. The TUF Gaming H3 headset filters out external sounds when you are listening to audio, while the AI noise-cancelling mic adapter removes these external sounds when you are speaking. Ultimately, this ensures you get the same experience in a noisy, busy area as you would if you were alone in a quiet environment. This is important in the current remote working climate, where many may be struggling because they are working at home. In these environments, children may be playing, phones may be ringing, and a variety of other noises can make finding a quiet spot to take a call almost impossible. Likewise, if you are taking part in a voice call at work, there will likely be a variety of other noisy happenings in your office. With the TUF Gaming H3 headset and AI noise-cancelling mic adapter, you will have the perfect audio system for both speaking with and listening to others. These products can be used in any situation. For gamers, it’ll detect and suppress the many noises that bounce around your gaming den, from keyboard and mouse clicks to whirring fans and computer beeps. The mic’s AI power also removes background voices, music and traffic noise – so it’s perfect for use at LAN parties, in internet cafes or on trains and buses. Both the ASUS TUF Gaming H3 headset and the ASUS AI Noise-Cancelling Mic Adaptor are available from Evetech. Click here to learn more about the ASUS TUF Gaming H3 headset. Click here to learn more about the ASUS AI Noise-Cancelling Mic Adaptor. This article was published in partnership with ASUS.