Police minister Bheki Cele has published the South African Police Service Amendment Bill for public comment, with the legislation set to introduce a number of additional requirements before a person is allowed to become a police officer in South Africa. While the SAPS already has requirements in place for physical fitness, mental fitness and education, the draft bill proposes a number of additional considerations which focus on the applicant’s background. Integrity test Under the proposed changes, every person that is newly recruited or considered for appointment to the SAPS as a police officer shall be subjected to an integrity test before appointment. The draft bill defines an integrity test as a personality test designed to verify whether a candidate is honest and dependable. This test may entail: The taking of fingerprints;
Taking a buccal sample (cheek swab) to be analysed for a DNA profile;
A polygraph test (a lie detector test);
Financial disclosures;
Disclosure of income and expenses;
Membership of entities such as boards, directorships and institutions;
Determination of contracts with the state. The draft bill states that no person under consideration can be appointed in the SAPS unless an integrity test has been successfully completed. The integrity test must be performed by the SAPS division responsible for Human Resources. Lifestyle audit The bill also proposes that a lifestyle audit be performed on any member where there are reasonable grounds to suspect that they are living above their income. The bill defines a “lifestyle audit” as a comparison of known income of a person with his or her standard of living. This would be to determine whether: There are gaps and indicators that a person is living above his or her means; or
The person is abusing power or influence for personal gain at that time or a later stage. This lifestyle audit would entail the disclosure of income and expenses, membership of entities such as boards, directorships and institutions, and determination of contracts with the state. The audit must be performed by the SAPS’ intelligence division. Any member of the SAPS may also be subjected to drug testing. In addition to the above, the bill states that a comparative search may be made into any official database in the SAPS in respect of the person whose integrity test or lifestyle audit is being performed. Read: New driving rules for South Africa in 2021 – what you need to know