The number of mobile Internet users in Africa is growing rapidly, primarily due to the rapid popularisation of smartphones and lack of fixed-line infrastructure. This has resulted in an explosion in the use of digital services on the continent – including mobile payments, online streaming, and instant messaging. President of International Sales at ZTE, Xiao Ming, who spoke at GSMA Thrive Africa event on 29 September 2020, believes 5G therefore presents a valuable economic opportunity for African countries to unlock the potential of these digital services. Furthermore, Ming said the continent as a whole is well positioned to take advantage of this new technology to advance digital transformation and the development of its digital economy. Ming noted that ZTE is confident Africa can take advantage of new technologies like 5G. “We are working hard with strategic partners to ensure Africa is not left behind in the 5G era,” Ming said. “ZTE’s vision in Africa is to bridge the digital divide and build a sustainable digital Africa.” In the next few years, digital technologies are expected to be essential in driving economic development and improving African people’s quality of life. High-speed communications technology like 5G can enable and enhance several industries to create new jobs and grow local economies. The potential technologies enabled through 5G include: Smart agriculture for better farming and increased food security.
Manufacturing automation for higher production and export potential.
Smart mining for safer and better extraction of resources.
Improved logistics and transportation to improve economic performance.
Real-time access to education and healthcare services. However, a major challenge to making these types of technologies available remains the lack of infrastructure to facilitate connectivity throughout different African countries. Ming said that ZTE continues to work with its operator customers to make sure that their short-term investments in 3G and 4G are in-line with the evolution path of 5G. “We are excited to help realise the African digital transformation with partners like MTN,” said Ming. Ming highlighted two key strategic areas that ZTE is focusing on in Africa. Firstly, it wants to ensure that communication services and access to the digital economy is affordable. This is why it offers consumers a wide range of smart devices – like wireless routers – at several price-points, and provides network deals to operators to help keep the cost of services in African markets at a reasonable level. Secondly, ZTE is dedicated to investing in Africa’s local talent, to ensure sustainable digital transformation. “That is why we invest into training and education, support innovation, and foster a local ecosystem of developers,” Ming said. As testament to this dedication, the company recently opened its fifth innovation and training centre in Africa. “We remain hopeful that a digital Africa will be realised at full speed,” Ming said. This article was published in partnership with ZTE.