Dubai has launched a new programme that will allow overseas remote working professionals to live in the Emirate while continuing to serve their employers in their home country. The move provides remote workers – and their families – the opportunity to re-locate, on an annual basis, to one of the world’s leading tourism and business destinations, said Dubai Tourism. “The global pandemic has changed how we live and work. As multinationals and leading start-ups across the world accelerate their rates of digital adoption, the need to be physically present to fulfil professional responsibilities has been redefined,” said His Excellency Helal Saeed Almarri, director-general at Dubai’s Department of Tourism and Commerce Marketing. “People continue to prioritise their health, wellbeing and ability to ensure a positive work-life balance. Dubai is uniquely positioned to offer a safe, dynamic lifestyle opportunity to these digitally savvy workers and their families while they continue to work remotely, whether it is for a couple of months or an entire year.” Through the programme, applicants can obtain all services in Dubai, including telecoms, utilities, and schooling, enabling them to experience the distinctive lifestyle enjoyed by people of over 200 nationalities. Applicants also benefit from Dubai’s zero income tax for individuals. “As one of the world’s top property destinations, Dubai has a vast portfolio of housing options to choose from, including beachfront and city villas and apartments, fully serviced hotel offerings managed by globally-recognised operators, and a diverse selection of short and longer-term holiday home rentals. “Widely regarded as a leading entrepreneurial hub, the city also provides exceptional co-working spaces, with flexible packages ranging from hourly rates for meeting rooms to weekly, monthly or quarterly bookings,” Dubai Tourism said. The programme costs $287 (R4,724) plus medical insurance with valid UAE coverage and processing fee per person. Criteria for eligibility under the new programme include: Passport with minimum six months validity;
Health insurance with UAE coverage validity;
Proof of Employment from current employer with a one-year contract validity, a minimum of $5,000 (R82,311) per month salary, last month’s payslip and three preceding months’ bank statements;
If the applicant is a company owner: proof of ownership of company for one year or more, with an average monthly income of $5,000 per month, and three preceding months’ bank statements. You can find out more about applying here. Read: These are the world’s best and worst pension systems