Google Meet, Skype, Zoom, WhatsApp, kanban boards, email trails, Slack — you name it. In the last six months utilisation of new communications has exploded as businesses have sought ways to keep operating through Covid-19 lockdowns. In the six months to June, MTN’s data traffic volumes in South Africa rose 77% year-on-year, while Vodacom said its data traffic in SA was up 98% year-on-year in the June quarter. Click here to learn more about Mytelnet’s voice communications services Meetings have been a particular growth area. According to Aternity’s Productivity Tracker, use of Microsoft Teams rose by 894% between mid-February and mid-June, while use of Zoom rose by 677%. To adapt to the new communications wave, the team at Mytelnet, a brand that has been in the market for nine years, has refined and refreshed the Mytelnet App. It is a David in a market full of Goliaths – but its competitive edge lies in its simplicity and low costs. The Mytelnet App is downloaded onto each employee’s mobile phone, which uses your organisation’s contact number as a gateway, rather than requiring employees to use their own phone numbers for incoming and outgoing calls. Employees only require good-quality internet connectivity. Local mobile and fixed line calls are charged at a flat rate – the current cost is 39c a minute. The Mytelnet App is easy to access, user-friendly, does not tie your business into a contract, and gives clear helpful dashboards for reporting and control. It will accommodate anything from an individual with a small business to a medium-sized organisation with over 200 employees. Mytelnet fits neatly into the suite of essential communications tools that a business needs now to remain engaged and connected with its customers and its teams. These tools include voice calls, video comms, chat, file management and sharing, and document collaboration. Mytelnet is in the business of voice communications. But it offers particular advantages over some of the other tools that are currently being used for the same purpose. For example, WhatsApp is a great chat and voice platform, but it is only possible to make calls to mobile numbers that are on the WhatsApp platform and saved as contacts. Using Mytelnet, the user can call any number (mobile or landline, on- or off-net), using data. Whereas Zoom, Google Meet or Microsoft Teams are great for group or one on one meetings, it is not always necessary to use their video option. In fact, most participants in remote meetings turn their video off. So meetings could be held just as well using the Mytelnet App, with participants dialled in on their mobile phones over a data connection (either using their phones’ data or other Wi-Fi connections). An internal company conference call is free. It is also possible to patch in a customer by adding the customer’s telephone number (mobile or landline). They need not download the app. Mytelnet is designed to boost your overall communications requirements. It delivers for business voice communication what Google Meet delivers for video conferencing, and WhatsApp delivers for messaging. With the rapid global shift towards the home becoming a multifunctional hub where people live, work, learn, shop and play, individuals and businesses are refining their approach towards both work-life balance and cost allocation. Consumers are starting to fine-tune the different tools they use for particular purposes. “We don’t see Mytelnet replacing the collaboration tools you’ve got used to, but it is a great addition to your remote work toolkit, giving you a better way to connect with customers. It also enables you to keep your business communication costs in a contained space by effectively giving you two numbers on your existing mobile device, one for your private affairs and one for your business communications,” Alastair Brockwell, Mytelnet Chief Growth Officer says. “What’s more, the Mytelnet portal gives you the ability to manage users, numbers, call groups and costs. We see this self-service capability as a vital requirement of the continually changing world of work.” Mytelnet makes it possible to track employee call spend across the company as well as to track and save all telephone numbers employees are calling. Users will be able to record calls for their own playback, while management will have the option to record all company calls to keep on file for a variety of reasons. Many employees working from home are having to use their own phones and data and claim back their costs from the company. It becomes onerous to separate company-funded calls from personal calls. Using Mytelnet, company calls go through the app and personal calls go through the employee’s private number. Mytelnet’s central hub will allow account administrators to create a user profile for each employee, allocate each profile a number, and group relevant users together according to their department or team. When customers call the organisation, they can choose which department they wish to speak to. Mytelnet can direct calls to a receptionist or an answering system with an interactive voice menu, depending on your business needs. Mytelnet has recently introduced a Freemium package. For up to three users, you get the app and the platform at no monthly cost, and you receive R10 of talk time to help you get started. For accounts with more than three users, you pay R35 per user and from the 51st user, the monthly fee drops to R15 per user. To find out more about Mytelnet, visit www.mytelnet.co.za or reach out to the team at tryus@mytelnet.co.za. This article was published in partnership with Mytelnet.